"Para-states" have formed in most conflict-affected areas.
In Chechnya, guerrilla fights continue in the wake of the Russian army's siege of the republic.
The conflict in Tajikistan ended in 1997 and the normalisation process is currently under way.
Each of these conflicts has entailed profound political, social, ethnic and economic changes, as well as affecting other spheres of life.
Presently, it is impossible to return to the pre-conflict situation.
The "para-states" have fortified their independence and are no longer controlled by the external powers on which they depended in the initial phases of the conflicts.
Unresolved conflicts, including those of Transnistria, Chechnya, Abkhazia, Nagorno-Karabakh, South Ossetia and, until recently, Tajikistan, have an adverse effect on the situation in the region.
However, with time, these negative effects become less and less turbulent.
So far, attempts at solving most of the conflicts (Transnistria, Abkhazia, Nagorno-Karabakh, South Ossetia) have failed to produce results other than cease-fires.
Permanent settlement could not be achieved, neither through the use of force nor by way of negotiation.
The power and independence of the "para-states", hard-line leaderships on both sides, and finally, military weakness of the metropolises consolidate the state of suspension.
The conflict in Tajikistan was settled using political methods, and the normalisation process is progressing in a satisfactory manner.
Chechnya has been conquered militarily by Russian troops and Moscow is now implementing its model of imposed "normalisation", but it does not have full control over the republic and cannot contain the growing problems induced by the conflict, such as the emergence of Chechen terrorism.
Some of the negative consequences of the conflicts are gradually being abated by the evolution in Russia's policy towards them (Russia is gradually ceasing playing on the conflicts as foreign policy instruments and is shifting towards political and economic measures).
In the longer term, these tendencies may also help in resolving the actual conflicts themselves.
Full text in pdf - 1.13 MB
The membership of the remaining countries is being spoken of (unofficially) in the perspective of ten to fifteen years.
However, no EU diplomat is able to answer the question of how the integration of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Kosovo, with the EU, will look in practice – these two organisms exist solely owing to the will and efforts of the international community.
Full text in pdf - 345 KB
Part II is an attempt to indicate the areas of Russian reality that are most deeply affected by the Chechen problem.
This is, to a certain degree, a return to the economic tasks set out by a team of reformists in the early 1990s, which were impossible to realise at the time due to conflicts between the Kremlin and legislative powers.
The political reforms introduced during Putin's term of office aimed primarily at increasing the Kremlin's control over Russia's socio-political life.
This goal has been achieved to a large extent.
In effect, it has given rise to a growth in the authority and position of the Kremlin, on the one hand and, on the other, to the authoritarisation of Russia's political system.
Within the economic sphere, over the past three and a half years, a land reform was carried out (enabling land sales transactions in the Russian Federation), and changes were also introduced within the budgetary-fiscal sphere and the pension system.
Russia was crossed off the Financial Action Task Force's (FATF) blacklist and granted the status of a market economy by the EU and the USA.
Simultaneously, however, press u re from various groups from the president's entourage opposing the reforms, and also business and regional elites, meant that reform projects often lost their liberal undertone and radicalism already at the stage of forming a legal base.
For this among other reasons, the changes initiated in almost all spheres of the Russian economy in many cases proved to be inconsistent and incomplete.
Problems with their implementation and the slow pace of structural reforms did not allow for the strengthening of spheres other than the raw material sector or making the Russian economy less dependent on the situation on foreign raw material markets.
Therefore, the main goals of President Putin's economic reform program have not been realized.
Non-legislative changes undertaken by the presidential circle were also of particular significance for Russia's present situation.
These changes had no legal basis and resulted from informal actions undertaken or inspired by the authorities.
As a result of these activities, the president gained a loyal majority in parliament, increased the role of security services in the country, simultaneously putting a stop to the direct influence of big business on the Kremlin's political decisions.
Non-legislative changes have also led to the restriction of freedom of speech and pluralism of information in Russia.
It seems that the reform process initiated by President Putin still depends primarily on the support of the Kremlin.
Because of this, the continuation of reforms over the coming years will be closely linked with Putin's position following his likely re-election in March 2004, and his political determination to continue with the changes.
Aside from internal factors, petroleum prices on the global market will also be of key significance for the reform process.
Such dependence is limiting Russia's chance for real modernization over the next few years.
Introduction Following his rise to power in 2000, Vladimir Putin presented a comprehensive socio-economic program for the development of Russia through to 20101.
This program was prepared by a team of economic experts from the Centre for Strategic Studies (CS S )2 led by St. Petersburg's German Gref.
In spite of the fact that this document was never accepted in its entirety, and only its main assumptions were approved, as of 2000, short- and medium-term socio-economic government program have been based on the same principles.
The medium-term goal of this development strategy through to 2010 was the reduction of the widening gap between Russia and developed nations.
The reforms of Russia's political system, social policy and the modernisation of the economy were intended to help achieve these goals.
The aim of this study is to describe and analyse political and socio-economic reforms, as well as non-legislative changes initiated under Vladimir Putin's presidency.
New reform activities will probably not be initiated over the six months remaining until the presidential elections.
For this reason, it is already possible to summarise the changes achieved in the political, economic and social spheres during President Putin's first term of office.
A description of the political and economic reforms and also of non-legislative changes, which took place in the Russian Federation over the past three and a half years, has been included in Part I of this study.
The conclusion hereof attempts to summarise the actual achievements of President Putin's team, and to answer the question concerning perspectives of the reform process and factors determining the shape there of.
Full text in pdf - 504 KB
Firstly, good relations with neighbours will underlie the broadly understood security of the Community.
Relations with the nearest neighbours will determine both military security of the EU (including the combating of terrorism) and its ability to prevent other threats such as illegal migration, smuggling, etc. Secondly, good economic relations with neighbours may contribute to the Member States' economic growth in the longer term.
And finally, the EU's ability to develop an effective and adequate policy towards its nearest neighbours will demonstrate its competence as a subject of international politics.
In other words, the EU will not be recognised as a reliable political player in the global scene until it develops an effective strategy for its neighbourhood.
The most overlooked element in the EU policy towards neighbours and one that requires most attention is the eastern dimension of this policy, i.e. the strategy towards Russia, Belarus, Ukraine and Moldova.
This direction of the EU neighbourhood policy has clearly attracted heightened attention over the last two years, though it remains overshadowed by relations with other regions bordering the Community, including the Balkans and the Southern Mediterranean.
During this period, a number of documents were published that addressed the question of the EU's future policy towards its eastern neighbours.
The most important ones included: New Neighbours Initiative - Council conclusions (18th November 2002), Communication from the Commission "Wider Europe - Neighbourhood: a new framework for relations with our Eastern and Southern Neighbours" (11th March 2003), Wider Europe - New Neighbourhood - Council Conclusions (18th June 2003), Communication from the Commission "Paving the way for a New Neighbourhood Instrument" (1st June 2003) and "The Second Northern Dimension Action Plan (2004-2006)" proposed by the Commission (10 June 2003) .
These documents, however, reveal many gaps and unsolved dilemmas that have to be addressed before the EU can create a coherent and comprehensive policy towards its eastern neighbours.
The present paper aims to pinpoint the most important of these and suggest potential solutions that would be optimal in the author's opinion.    Full text in pdf - 420 KB
Ryszard Kapuściński, Shah of Shahs  Introduction The former USSR area plays a great role in the international oil and gas market.
Russia is a real gas giant, with the richest deposits of this material in the world.
Russia is also the main exporter of natural gas to many European countries.
Keeping a strong position in this market remains a priority for the Russian Federation's economic policy.
Europe is a very attractive region because its demand for gas is expected to grow steadily, while its own gas production keeps decreasing.
In the long term, the Far East will be an important market for Russian exports, too.
Caspian gas producers, for the time being, can not really compete with Russia in this field, and this status quo will most probably be preserved in the nearest future.
The post-Soviet countries also have substantial oil deposits.
Among CIS members, Russia has the richest oilfields; Kazakhstan comes second, with large proven deposits of petroleum.
In the Eurasian market, raw materials coming from the former USSR area are the major alternative to oil produced by OPEC countries.
Russia does not belong to the cartel, and during the last two years, when international oil prices remained high, it continued to substantially increase both the production levels and exports.
European countries are the main consumers of Russian petroleum, yet in the future, Russia may strengthen its role in such markets as the USA, Japan and other countries trying to become less dependent on OPEC oil.
A boost in production and exports by Kazakhstan and Azerbaijan, countries situated by the Caspian Sea, should also be expected in the next five years.
The significance of this region for the international market is bound to grow when new oil transport routes, independent of Russia, are opened (see chapter Export potential of the post-Soviet region).
This collection of papers attempts to give an accurate and clear description of the main characteristics and of the key problems pertaining to the oil and gas sectors in the former USSR.
It is aimed at showing the wealth and production and export opportunities on the one hand and at outlining a number of problems that now limit the development of trade in energy materials in this region and might impede it in the future.
These issues seem to be of particular importance in the context of the dilemmas facing the Polish and European energy security policy.
This report consists of five studies, focusing on: the resources and export potential of the Commonwealth of Independent States countries, Russian policy towards the entire oil and gas sector in the former USSR area and in the countries of the former Eastern bloc, and the role the energy resources potential plays in Russian foreign policy.
Also, the studies outline the situation of the so-called transit countries, i.e. the ones controlling major export pipelines for Russian oil and gas, discuss the importance of foreign direct investments for the oil and gas sectors, as well as the opportunities and dangers that natural resource wealth might pose to the development of CIS countries.
In terms of geographic coverage, the studies pertain to both key oil or gas producers (Russia, Kazakhstan, Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan) and the important transit countries for energy resources from CIS area (Ukraine, Belarus, Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia).
While working on this project, we used the generally available literature, statistical yearbooks, specialist press and agency and internet news bulletins.
We also want to acknowledge the valuable comments from CIS countries oil and gas experts, whom we to talked to while working on this project.
Full text in pdf - 408 KB
No road map for negotiations was proposed in Thessaloniki, and neither was even a tentative accession date stated, although leaders of the Balkan five had asked for this in a joint statement.
The SAP, a special association procedure developed specifically for the integration of the Western Balkan states, may even lead to a "freezing" of the Balkan countries' integration at the initial level.
The situation looks even worse in economic terms.
This may deepen the civilisational gap between the region and its neighbours, stall economic growth in the Western Balkans, and undermine the Balkan societies' confidence in European institutions.
Full text in pdf - 539 KB
With 70 million citizens, it is the most populous candidate country, and if it were admitted to the EU, around the year 2020 would become the single most populous Member State.
It would also be the only UE Member State inhabited almost exclusively by Muslims.
Like Cyprus, it lies almost entirely in the Asian continent.
Because of the scale of Turkey's internal problems, the country faces much more serious reservations concerning its accession than the remaining candidates.
Turkey's membership application meets with the strongest opposition in the European Union.
This paper aims to discuss the history of the complex relations between Turkey and the European Union, the main issues that impede Turkey's integration with the Community, including the country's internal problems in particular, and the transformations taking place in Turkey under the influence of Community policy.
Key points 1.
Integration with the European Union offers Turkey a good opportunity to consolidate its democratic political system and modernise the country.
As Turkey adapts to European standards, it will have to gradually dismantle the system founded on the special position of the army as the guarantor of internal stability and predictability of Ankara's foreign policy, which has been in place for over 80 years.
The EEC/EU policy towards Turkey is the resultant of two forces.
On the one hand, there is the awareness of Turkey's strategic importance and the need to avoid pushing it away from Europe On the other, there is knowledge of the scale of problems faced by Turkey, fear that adaptation to European standards might trigger the country's destabilisation, concern about the consequences of Turkey's integration for the Union itself, and finally, a sense of the country's cultural and religious dissimilarity.
Consequently, the question of whether Turkey should join the Union has yet to be answered.
With more realistic membership prospects after Turkey became a candidate country in 1999, and with the moderately favourable internal situation, Turkey decided to initiate serious pro-European reforms.
These two factors have also demonstrated that the EU is capable of influencing the internal situation in Turkey to a much greater extent.
Complete implementation of the reforms will take a few years and their success will largely depend on increased involvement of the EU in the process of Turkey's integration.
Full text in pdf - 539 KB
The assumption behind the EU's policy is that Moldova is not going to join the Union, though theoretically, such a development is not precluded.
Chisinau does indeed aspire to join the European Union.
The EU is interested in Moldova chiefly because of the threat this country may pose to the security of the Union's future south-eastern outskirts.
This concern about security stems from Moldova's serious instability, and especially from the existence of the separatist Transnistrian Moldovan Republic, which is involved in various illegal or semi-legal businesses and provides a stronghold to crime.
This paper deals with the EU policy towards Moldova and the multiple facets of this policy, the most important of which seems to be the preclusion of Moldova's accession in the foreseeable future.
Finally, this paper also covers the legal framework of the co-operation between Brussels and Chisinau, the Community's assistance to Moldova and its implementation, the EU policy towards the conflict in Transnistria and the Union's (current and projected) role in its settlement as well as the plans for future co-operation between the two sides.
Full text in pdf - 539 KB
Unlike the southern maritime border of the EU, the eastern land border poses a number of different challenges.
These pertain, above all, to issues of ''soft security'' (i.e. smuggling, illegal migration, organised crime, etc.), but also to the fact that all the most important communication and trade routes connecting Europe with Eurasia cross this boundary.
The borderline goes through areas inhabited by people of similar cultural and historical backgrounds, who are, in a way, socially and ethnically related.
It therefore plays a much greater role in social terms than the southern border.
The northern part of Estonian-Russian borderland on the Estonian side is mostly inhabited by Russians, and in the southern part on both sides by the Setu ethnic group.
A Belarussian minority lives in the border regions of Latvia (the Daugavpils and Kraslava regions), Lithuania, and Poland (the area around Bialystok and Biala Podlaska).
On the other hand, Poles live in the western part of Belarus (the Hrodna and Brest districts) and Ukraine (the Lviv district).
In turn, Ukrainians live in eastern Slovakia.
The Trans-Carpathian region of Ukraine is partly inhabited by Hungarians.
The EU border also divides communities which used to live in one country in Soviet times and have preserved social ties (the Baltic States' borders with Russia and Belarus).
A characteristic of the areas on both sides of the new EU eastern border is its peripheral nature.
Mostly rural communities whose economic indicators are much worse than in the rest of the country, they are also undersubsidised regions, with substantially higher unemployment levels than the country average, and lacking large industrial centres (except for the cities of Narva, Hrodna, Brest, Bialystok, Lublin and Lviv).
This peripheral character contributes to the development of cross-border contacts and mutual attraction, especially in business terms.
Cross-border trade, both legal and illegal, is an important source of income for local inhabitants.
Full text of CES Studies no.14 in pdf - 2.7MB
Russian-speakers are a numerous minority in Latvia and Estonia, which causes deep division in these countries from the ethnical point of view.
The problem of highest importance in the legal aspect is the unregulated status of the Russian-speakers.
Though they are permanent residents of Latvia and Estonia many of them still do not have these countries' citizenship.
The complex naturalisation procedure introduced by Latvia and Estonia soon after restoring independence in 1991 is considered to be main responsible for this.
The policy of Latvian and Estonian local authorities towards the minority remains rather restrictive.
This is the effect of a lack of trust of the native inhabitants in the Russians, connected with fifty years of both countries' Soviet occupation, during which the Latvians and Estonians felt like national minorities in their own countries.
Their present approach towards the minority is determined by the will to counteract the results of many years of the russification and sovietisation of Latvia and Estonia and to neutralise the effect of planned population changes, to be carried out by the Soviet authorities and based on the removal of large groups of Russian-speakers, of whom the majority were Russians, to the territories of the then Baltic republics.
The naturalisation, integration and education policy of the present Latvian and Estonian local authorities mainly concentrates on the attempt to assimilate Russian-speakers, and is received by the minority as discrimination.
Despite the fact that in Estonia this process is carried out in a less abrupt manner and causes less objection from the Russian-speakers than in Latvia, both countries are visibly and consistently thriving to recreate national states which would resemble pre-USSR Latvia and Estonia.
The key postulates of Russian minority representatives' in Latvia and Estonia concern the maximum simplification or even full cancellation of the naturalisation procedure in order for all permanent residents living in those countries to be considered citizens.
Further postulates concern equally important matters, such as maintaining the possibility of educating in the Russian language, and in the case of Latvia, granting local election voting rights to permanent residents who do not have Latvian citizenship.
Under the pressure of international organisations, Latvian and Estonian local authorities are gradually introducing the liberalisation of legislation in minority matters; despite this they have yet to satisfy the Russian-speakers.
In spite of the feeling of marginalisation, the Russians and Russian-speakers in Latvia and Estonia form a strong group of political pressure on these countries' local authorities.
The opinions and demands of a numerous group of permanent residents cannot be completely ignored by Latvians and Estonians, as this would contradict the principles generally applied by democratic countries and EU members.
Human rights and national minority defence argumentation is mainly used in the dispute over the minority's interests.
To put pressure on Latvia's and Estonia's local authorities, these countries are being presented on the international forum as ethnically conflicted and disregarding human rights.
International organisations have yet not assumed a definite position on the Russian- -speaking minority problem in the Baltic States.
International organisations, engaged in human rights defence generally do not have objections to Latvian and Estonian legislation in the national minority matter.
On the other hand, these organisations, being under the pressure of Russia, appeal to Latvia's and Estonia's local authorities for the further extenuation of regulations concerning naturalisation, education, national language and the electoral law.
Full text of CES Studies no.14 in pdf - 2.7MB
These have had a great impact on the present form of the state, its political scene and power mechanisms.
President Emomali Rakhmonov is the central figure in the state.
The political system, which he has cocreated, is based on - unique in this region - political pluralism (the existence of the Islamic party), decentralisation (far-going independence of the regions and relatively limited potential of the central structures) and compromise as the basic way of resolving conflicts.
Such a system has so far guaranteed stabilisation and normalisation of the country.
Since 2002, gradual erosion of the system, which is due to the president's political offensive and occurrence of new threats (new forms of Muslim fundamentalism) has been visible.
The president's attempts to unilaterally challenge the existing order may rekindle the old conflicts.
The system's evolution and reform is necessary, a good occasion for which should be the 2005 parliamentary elections.
11th September 2001 and the consequences thereof, i.e. actions of the antiterrorist coalition in the region and Tajikistan's participation in them has meant a real breakthrough for the country.
Those events have removed the greatest threats (the Taliban Afghanistan), made the country really open to the world and cooperation with other countries that CIS members, raised its prestige and reinforced its position in the international arena.
Although they have not broken the Russian domination in the region - especially felt in Tajikistan - still, they have challenged its monopolist position in the fields of security, regional policy, economic activity and domination in terms of civilisation in the broad meaning of the word.
Reinforcement of the country's internal stability (inter alia through adaptation of some democratic mechanisms) and skilful usage of the interest the powerful states show in Tajikistan is a unique opportunity for this country's development.
Full text of CES Studies no.15 in pdf - 753KB
Kazakhstan owes its position of the regional leader of change to its consistent reform policy during the recent decade, the implementation of which has been definitely facilitated by the stable internal and international situation of the country and its political system, called "velvet authoritarianism".
Nevertheless, Kazakhstan's success would not have been possible, if not for its economic potential and the favourable conditions on the world markets.
The political situation of the country, which is criticised by the international community, is quite good in the regional context; owing to his strong position, president Nazarbayev fully controls the situation, his actions are predictable, which strengthens the sense of stability and security among the citizens.
Therefore, the limitation of democratic liberties has hardly any meaning for a vast majority of Kazakhstan's residents.
Introduction Just several years ago, the position of Kazakhstan as the regional leader was not so obvious.
Since the emergence of the independent republics in Central Asia, there has been rivalry for leadership between Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan, which to a great extent has been an effect of the personal leadership ambitions of the countries' respective presidents, Nursultan Nazarbayev and Islam Karimov.
While Uzbekistan prefers the model of leadership based on political and military hegemony, Kazakhstan chooses economic development.
Nevertheless, Kazakhstan has managed to outdo Uzbekistan in the military field, too.
Currently, it has the largest and best equipped army in the region in terms of both absolute categories and its operational potential.
The increasing income from exports of energy raw materials, the growing GDP and the highest among CIS countries level of foreign investments, combined with the adopted economic development strategy have helped Kazakhstan to achieve the position of the indisputable leader of economic change in the entire region during the recent five years.
At the same time, it should be emphasised that the political situation of the country, though far from the ideal, makes it stand out among the other Central Asian states.
Political reform cannot keep pace with the impressive tempo of economic change.
Unless the dissonance between the economic and political situations in Kazakhstan is levelled, in the longer term, it may hinder further economic development of the country.
Full text of CES Studies no.15 in pdf - 753KB
The international community has perceived the country as the pillar of stability in the region.
This perception was further reinforced after 11th September 2001 and was certainly among the factors that inspired the United States to start closer political and military cooperation with Tashkent.
The administration in Washington had expected that closer contacts might galvanise political, economic and social change in Uzbekistan, thus reinforcing positive trends in other countries of the region as well.
But the relations between Washington and Tashkent are in crisis (which the United States will certainly try to overcome), and we have seen rapprochement between Uzbekistan and Russia and China.
Uzbekistan is slipping ever deeper into economic and social crisis, and the forecasts are pessimistic.
The scale of problems (which could be tackled through genuine reforms, but not an imitation of reforms) and the uncertainty as to how the political situation will develop (which causes interest groups to brace themselves for expected change) may threaten the country's stability.
Should the political and social order in Uzbekistan break down, the entire Central Asia will become deeply destabilised.
It is worrying that the negative trends in Uzbekistan are on the rise and in the present circumstances they seem almost impossible to reverse.
Uzbekistan's potential of instability is the product of the country's internal policies.
In the economy, the authorities implemented wrong economic policies, failed to liberalise and open the market, conserved the centrally planned model of economy and inadequately distribute budget revenues (a large portion of which is spent on the oversized administration and the excessively extended security apparatus).
In politics, the clans continue to vie for influence and various interest groups are likely to step up their struggle to take over power in the country.
There is no serious secular alternative to the existing order, and moderate Islam ideology (not radical but still independent of the state administration) have been eliminated.
Repression against the opposition (real and perceived) has radicalised large sections of the society.
The suicide terror attacks (in late March/ early April and on 30th July), which happened for the first time in Uzbekistan's history and targeted the state security apparatus, were symptomatic of the direction of developments.
It is very probable that more such attacks will take place.
Full text of CES Studies no.15 in pdf - 753KB
The actions Putin has taken since being re-elected are aimed at consolidating the Kremlin's control over the political, economic and social spheres.
Further liquidation of political and informational pluralism, an increase of the ruling group's control over state and private property, and an intensification of state propaganda aimed at generating social support for the Kremlin's initiatives have all proceeded apace.
These processes reinforce authoritarian tendencies and strengthen the emerging monocentric political system, with the President's strong domination over political, economic and social life.
Since Putin's re-election no return to wide-ranging economic reforms can be observed; previously, the reformist impetus of the President's team had been checked halfway though his first term of office, with a view to the approaching parliamentary and presidential elections).
Thus, the concentration of power in the President's hands (which had been repeatedly named as a sine qua non for the implementation of unpopular reforms) has not brought about any continuation of economic reforms.
The authorities have limited themselves to selected actions in the social sphere and have made no attempts to reform the area of the natural resource monopolies.
Instead, one may observe the consumption of the fruits of the boom in the raw material markets, and the demonstration of Russia's remarkable economic indicators (which in fact mostly derive from high oil prices).
Meanwhile, unfavourable conditions for long-term economic development in Russia are growing: the archaic structure of the economy is being strengthened (the overwhelming dominance of big businesses over small- and medium-sized enterprises in GDP production); the raw-material profile of the Russian economy is being reinforced (at the cost of services and technologies), the Kremlin's political control and "manual steering" of the economy is growing, and corruption (the which is a serious problem for the effective functioning of the Russian economy) has not been reduced.
The elections and the beginning of Vladimir Putin's second term of office were a period which saw an increase in the Kremlin's control over both state and private property.
This was done by strengthening the position of big state companies (especially in the raw materials sector), by increasing the amount of state regulation over the strategic sectors of the economy, and by tightening control of private companies.
At the same time, the right to private property is being violated by the ruling elite.
Such actions have already lead to an increased flight of capital from Russia, and to a general deterioration of the country's image as a stable, predictable economic partner which encourages foreign investments.
In the last few months Russian political life has witnessed a visible intensification of Kremlin propaganda, based on the ideology of security.
The authorities are trying to create an image of Russia as a country besieged by the hostile outside world (especially the West), and undermined from within by a democratic "fifth column".
The Russian authorities, using the media, are requiring a unification of forces in the battle against terrorism.
In practice, this means a strengthening of the President's powers at the cost of other centres of public life, as well as an intensification of xenophobia and distrust towards all forms of dissidence and dissent.
Moreover, the Kremlin is trying to involve the Russian Orthodox Church in the struggle for people's minds.
Since the very beginning of Vladimir Putin's rule, we have witnessed a visible expansion in the appointment of security service representatives (the so-called "chekists"), as well as their increasing influence on politics, the economy and social issues.
This tendency has been maintained since Putin's re-election.
At the moment, the "chekists" have influence not only on state government issues, but also have increasing access to financial resources.
At the present stage of Putin's rule, a wider process can be noted of appointing Putin's close colleagues from the security services to key posts in state-controlled companies.
Also, the "chekists" activity keeps growing in the sphere of ideology.
During the recent year, the destabilization of the region, which affects many fields of Russian political and social life, has grown to an alarming size.
There are many reasons for the instability in the region; they stem from numerous political, religious and socioeconomic problems and conflicts.
They all overlap, interweave and create a complex network.
The most difficult problem is the war in Chechnya, lasting since the early 90's, which is spilling over the neighboring republics, takes increasingly more drastic shapes and poses a threat to the security and stability of the entire country.
The conflict stimulates dangerous tendencies and processes all over Caucasus: it is one of the reasons for the intensifying anti-Russian sentiments in the local communities, and it accelerates their drifting towards radical Islam, etc. Moreover, the region is a scene of numerous ethnic conflicts (the conflicts in Dagestan, the western part of Caucasus, the Ingush- -Ossetian conflict), religious (mainly inside Islam) and conflicts between the indigenous Russian people and immigrants from Caucasus and Central Asia in Stavropol and Krasnodar Krais as well as acute socioeconomic problems (poverty, unemployment, overpopulation, growing crime).
Since the collapse of the USSR, the Kremlin has failed to frame a consistent and long-term concept for development of North Caucasus and its integration with the rest of Russia.
The Russian authorities' policy towards Caucasus is limited to emergency actions, responding to crises instead of preventing them.
The authorities are still making the same mistakes, unwilling to recognize their obvious failures.
The key elements of the policy include: preventing any interference of other countries and international organizations in the region, conducting the "antiterrorist operation", supporting the puppet regimes in particular republics, marginalisation of the opposition and the far-flung propaganda in the mass media, which shows a false picture of the reality.
A great role in the Caucasian policy of the Kremlin is played by law enforcement structures, whose interests often collide with the interests of the Russian state.
Such a policy does not lead to resolving problems and conflicts, on the contrary, it leads to deepening and escalation thereof.
The future of North Caucasus depends on either settlement or worsening of the existing problems; if they intensify, Caucasus will be plunging in chaos.
The instability in the region is accompanied by further-reaching processes, i.e. gradual drifting apart of Caucasus from Russia, its derussification and increasingly faster Islamisation.
Such tendencies, which in the prospect of several decades could end in a high degree of autonomy or even separation of the region from the Russian Federation, could be slowed down through working out of a comprehensive concept for development of the region.
However, for the time being, the Kremlin has neither political will nor ability to develop and implement such a concept: the main reasons for that are the views of the Russian ruling elites and the general condition of the Russian state (the lack of sufficient financial means, lack of proper staff, resistance of the law enforcement structures, degeneration of the state structures, etc.).
North Caucasus is a region where many serious problems are concentrated.
The future of Russia will depend on their resolution (the Chechen war, other ethnic and religious conflicts, rapid growth of non-Russian and Muslim population, decreasing number of ethnic Russians, etc.).
So long as Moscow is unable to resolve them, Russia will be an unpredictable and instable country, in danger of terrorism and convulsed by internal conflicts.
Unless the Kremlin copes with the issue of Caucasus, it will not be possible for Russia to enter on the path of democratic reform, to make the attempt to create a modern country, open to global cooperation.
Caucasus is today a source of disintegration of the Russian state, of its structures and society; unless this is held back, in the longer term, it may become a source of its collapse.
Russia's position in the post-Soviet area and, above all, in South Caucasus will also depend on the way the situation in North Caucasus develops.
Full text in pdf - 791KB
3.
4.
5.
Most importantly, it depends on: a.
Russia and its energy policy priorities b.
- Policies of consumer countries, including the EU in particular.
Full text in pdf - 1.05MB
Natural gas is transported mostly by gas pipelines which permanently connect gas producers and consumers.
Thus Europe as a consumer is "tied" to certain gas suppliers for anywhere between a dozen and several tens of years.
As their own resources are becoming depleted, the EU Member States get increasingly dependent on import of natural gas.
The present paper discusses the existing and projected gas transport routes from Russia to the EU.
The first part deals with the importance of gas exports to the economy of the Russian Federation, and the second delves into the EU Member States' dependence on gas imports.
Then this paper examines the differences in perceiving the energy security issue between the old and the new Member States, those differences stemming from the different degrees of their dependence on Russian supplies.
In the third part, two new transport route projects for Russian gas supplies to the EU are compared and it is argued that from the point of view of the Community's interests, the Yamal gas pipeline is a better solution than the North European (Trans-Baltic) gas pipeline.    Full text in pdf - 985 KB
The European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) has been playing a significant part in the context of these changes.
In the cases of Moldova and Ukraine, which are the countries interested in enhancing co-operation with the EU, the ENP has provided a formula that allows taking steps to implement this objective.
The ENP has also contributed to "outlining an alternative" to Belarus' current self-isolation.
However, the ENP has first of all given a clear message to Russia by specifying the EU's interests and objectives concerning Eastern Europe.
The ENP has clearly stated that the EU wants to build democracy and a free market in those countries, and has signalled that the European Union intends to discuss the issues concerning the countries directly with them, and not through Moscow's offices.
The main shortcoming of the ENP appears to be the disproportion between the number of commitments and tasks that the neighbours must make and carry out and the benefits promised by the EU.
Currently, the ENP does not offer membership prospects, and other concessions made by the European Union have not been clearly defined (neither in terms of the scope nor the terms and conditions of implementation).
This lack of balance between the European Union's great aspirations to influence its neighbours and the limited offer it addresses to those neighbours seems to be a problem of such magnitude that, unless the situation changes, it may paralyse further implementation of the ENP.
The mechanisms and objectives of the ENP have been determined in rather general terms, which gives the EU great freedom of action in its policy towards the Eastern partners.
On the one hand, the ENP allows for a very reserved approach or even the simulation of real actions; yet on the other, it does not exclude the possibility of very active engagement by the EU (including holding out the prospect of membership for the European neighbours).
This shows that the ENP does not definitely determine the nature of the EU engagement.
A great deal depends on the political will on the part of both the European Union's structures and its individual member states.
The ENP's flexibility seems to be a particularly valuable feature; it gives an opportunity for an evolutional change to this formula which may be inspired by both new experiences and the changing reality.
Full text in pdf - 170 KB
The regime change occurred largely as a result of an anti-system public protest known as the orange revolution.
However, Maydan did not principally formulate any positive programme.
Hence, the principal challenge for the new authorities should be to reshape the system which Leonid Kuchma continued building for years as a kind of symbiosis between political and business groups and the bureaucracy.
Yushchenko's pre-election declarations, the presentation of his programme and the choice of European integration as the strategic objective, which the president repeatedly declared in his speeches both in Ukraine and during his many foreign visits, all these indicate that the system reconstruction is meant to lead to the creation of a democratic state of law and a market economy.
In the period in question, the new authorities' policy was focused on dismantling the system created by the former regime and on wide-scale replacements of officials, struggle against corruption and implementation of the social promises made during the campaign.
This could be regarded as preparation for the implementation of the principal objectives concerning the creation of a new Ukraine, but in fact the government is largely motivated by the short-term goal of next year's parliamentary elections.
Another term used to refer to the upheaval is Maydan, standing for Independence Square (Maydan Nezalezhnosti), the main square in Kyiv where the several-weeks long protest was staged.
obvious that the new political style and the manner of operation of the new authorities are often reminiscent of the previous regime.
Particularly difficult to accept are practices such as the use of law to one's own ends and behind-the-scenes bargaining over appointments and competencies of officials.
This is due to the fact that the new authorities include many people who held high state offices in various periods of Leonid Kuchma's presidency.
The old habits and attitudes, sometimes combined with involvement in various political-business arrangements, adversely affect the quality of politics.
The problems that emerged already in the first months suggest that the transformation process in Ukraine is going to be difficult, long, and susceptible to various distortions, and that the principal reforms will only be undertaken after the parliamentary election of March 2006.
Full text in pdf - 169 KB
Growing expectations, both economic and political, seemed vain due to mounting impediments.
The victory of Viktor Yanukovych was perceived by many opinion-makers as a nail in the coffin of such aspirations.
In Ukraine, almost since the moment of regaining independence, the following two public order models, in which inherent are completely different system-related preferences of the citizens, have co-existed: the decentralised model of a "network" society, where dominate parallel mutual dependences between people who opt for a democratic political system; and the centralist model of social integration, where order is ensured via the vertical relation of power and submission.
In the latter case, democracy seems dubious and preference is given to various kinds of systems having a strong central authority.
Over the past ten years, the decentralised model has been slowly strengthening, and its influence has been expanding.
Viktor Yanukovych was in the common opinion a supporter of the centralist vision, and his victory in the election was perceived as an immediate threat to the already known and familiar rules of activity in parallel relations.
Yanukovych was believed to be a player who would impose his own rules, without respecting the already existing ones.
Foreign policy issues, a "pro-European" or "anti- European" approach of the authorities, hardly had any significance during the orange revolution.
Its causes were purely internal.
However, as the events developed, the stance taken by the international community became important for Ukrainians and could contribute to a significant growth of pro-European sentiments.
"Revolution" was the favourite word of most commentators in their descriptions of the events in late 2004, connected with the presidential election in Ukraine.
Still, some of them - few as they were - protested against this term pointing out to many elements that proved evolutional rather than revolutionary nature of the changes taking place there.
I suggest leaving this issue to future political scientists and historians, who will certainly answer the question whether that was a revolution and if it was not, how to name it1.
This text is an attempt to reflect on what really happened in Ukraine in the last months of 2004, regardless of whether we call such events revolution, rebellion, social movement or anything else.
Any mass social movements mainly draw attention of the mass media, yet soon they also become a subject of analysis for political scientists, sociologists and other specialists in social sciences, who try to answer the question if "this" could have been predicted?
Post factum we usually state that there were very many signs of an approaching outbreak but nobody paid sufficient attention to such "harbingers".
Even more so because social processes are almost never launched by only one factor.
A well-known American political scientist James Davies (1962) noticed in the early 1960's that one of the factors provoking social movements is the discrepancy between social expectations & aspirations and the possibility to satisfy them.
Davies initially formulated his theory, which has become classical today, in terms of socioeconomic expectations.
Social expectations usually grow when the economic situation starts improving.
Then expectations and hopes concerning both material and non-material issues grow; starting from the possibility to do business in an unrestricted way through such ideas as the freedom of speech.
Expectations also grow when the society has managed to develop parallel ways of communication and gaining the awareness of its subjectivity, independently of the existing political system.
Full text in pdf - 391KB
The years 1999-2004 were a period of dynamic development in all sectors of Russian economy, and saw a rapid growth in GDP of over 7 per cent per year.
Russia owed the excellent macroeconomic results of that period to a combination of favourable factors.
In 2004, despite very high oil and gas prices on world markets, a slowdown of the GDP growth took place.
Even though the economy is still developing fairly rapidly, we are able to say that Russia is exhausting those traditional mechanisms (apart from oil and gas prices) which have hitherto stimulated GDP growth.
In the longer term, these unsolved structural problems may seriously impede Russia's economic growth.
The favourable economic situation has nevertheless failed to bring about the modernisation of the manufacturing sector.
Institutions of a civic society, which are essential for achieving and maintaining stable economic growth, have not developed either.
There are still no firm guarantees of ownership in Russia.
Despite tax reform, Russian state institutions still remain instruments of administrative and legal repressions.
Since the times of the Soviet Union, relatively low production costs (the raw material, energy and labour costs) have invariably been the only advantage of most sectors of Russian industry.
A common problem of almost all sectors is their technological backwardness and the low quality of produce.
These factors actually exclude Russia from European and global markets of major manufacture production (e.g. in the automotive and aircraft industry).
Another factor impeding economic growth is the exhaustion of extensive growth possibilities.
Further growth now depends on investments in infrastructure and new technologies.
However, the political and economic processes taking place in Russia in recent years have discouraged potential investors.
The Kremlin's economic policy as of 2003 has also contributed to the slowdown in economic growth by increasing state interference in the economy and expanding state presence in the strategic sectors (oil, gas and finance).
Another impediment is the evident change of relations between business and the authorities (best illustrated by the Yukos affair).
A direct result of such situation is the limitation of business activity and Russia's damaged image on the global arena.
Full text in pdf - 1.8MB
However, this does not mean that there have been no achievements in EU-Russian relations.
The key problem is that Russia and the European Union have essentially different perceptions, aspirations and interests, which causes mistrust and disillusionment.
This crisis is manifested in mutual criticism by the two sides, regularly recurring tensions and cooling of relations ("minicrises"), and especially by the "virtualisation of co-operation", i.e. concealing a lack of substantive content in many key areas under increasingly rich layers of dialogue and co-operation.
The causes of the crisis differ, and some of them are profound.
Most of them originate from Russia and its policy.
These fundamental reasons include a lack of any clear definition of Russia's civilisational identity (whether it is a European or a Eurasian state), a lack of any defined and established vision of Russia's place in the modern world, and of a policy based thereon (the "great power" option vs. the pro-integration option), a crisis in Russia's "European project" (supporters of Russia's actual integration with the European area are in a minority among the Russian ruling elite), a lack of understanding and a negative perception of the EU and its policy by a great part of that Russian ruling elite, and the failure to develop a vision of an ultimate model of relations with the EU by the Russian government.
The internal crisis in the EU (its unclear prospects for institutional reform, enlargement and neighbourhood policy) is adversely affecting its policy towards Russia.
Additionally, the crisis is worsened by other factors, which on one hand are linked to the peculiarity of the Russian Federation's policy, and on the other result from the conflict of interests between Russia and the European Union.
In the first case, the current Russian authorities are sticking to a model of government (authoritarianism) which is essentially different from European standards, and they resort to negative political tactics in their relations with the EU (including by exploiting differences of opinions within the EU for their own benefit).
In the second case, discrepancies between the two sides' respective policies towards a "common neighbourhood" (especially towards the western countries of the CIS situated between Russia and the EU) take prominence.
Russia has been attempting to support a specific political and economic model in this area, different from that suggested by the EU, as it perceives the EU's activity as a challenge to its interests.
The future of Russian-EU relations depends on many factors.
An analysis of the current key trends leads to the following conclusions: - It should not be expected in the short term that the situation will clearly improve, nor that the crisis will be overcome, mainly due to the fundamental causes thereof and a lack of signs of any essential change in either Russia's domestic policy or its international environment.
full text of CES Studies no.22 in pdf - 457KB
The main assumptions of this reform were presented during a congress of the pro-Kremlin Unity movement, in Putin's address entitled 'Russia at the turn of the millennium' which was delivered on 29 December 1999, and later in a open letter to voters published on 25 February 2000.
Nearly seven years have passed since Vladimir Putin came to power, a time for a summary of his achievements.
In a way, Vladimir Putin has partially delivered on his initial declarations; indeed, Russia has undergone a deep transformation.
However, when seen in the light of the president’s initial promises, the changes appear to be no more than 'counter-reforms', because instead of putting into practice the policy he outlined seven years ago, they have largely followed a different, if not entirely opposite direction.
Full text in pdf - 580KB
The region's history and the increasingly tense situation in the other Caucasian republics bordering Chechnya suggest that instability will probably continue for many more years.
Several years ago, the conflict in Chechnya could have been characterised as a war between Chechen separatists and the government of the Russian Federation.
At present, it is not only a Russian-Chechen conflict, but also an internal clash between the separatist militants and those Chechens who are co-operating with Moscow.
The conflict also has an increasingly apparent social background.
Even though the intensity of fighting in Chechnya has abated in recent years, the conflict has spilt over to the other Caucasus republics such as Ingushetia, Dagestan and Kabardino-Balkaria.
The latter seek to 'liberate' the entire North Caucasus and establish sharia law in the region.
Today, it manifests itself not through armed struggle, but through demands for ever-wider autonomy within the Russian Federation ('hidden' separatism).
The objective is to acquire real, rather than formal, independence from Moscow, especially in the economic sphere.
An analysis of the current situation in the republic leads to the conclusion that this objective has already largely been achieved; today Chechnya in many areas remains outside the Russian legal system and enjoys extensive internal autonomy.
A renewed outbreak of the armed conflict in Chechnya seems unlikely in the immediate future, the main reason for this being that the Chechen people are tired of the long war.
In the former case, the movement will be probably led by the current, formally pro-Russian government.
However, it is also possible that by that time, the Caucasian Islamists will have gained enough strength to become the driving force behind a new, massive uprising against Russia, whose objective will be to create an Islamic state in the North Caucasus.
Full text in pdf - 197KB
According to the authorities, the wide-range renationalisation of the assets and the construction of superholdings based on the state enterprises are intended to boost Russia's potential and stimulate the development of the whole economy.
However, in practice the current ruling elite are using these superholdings to strengthen Russia's position on the international arena and to promote their vested interests.
Full text available in pdf - 660KB
So far, however, it appears from the reactions in the West that Moscow will not succeed in obtaining any revision of the existing conventional arms control regime or any other concessions on the part of Western countries.
Russia's possible withdrawal from the CFE Treaty (which in such a case is likely) will cause a further deterioration of the political climate of that country's relations with the West.
In the military sphere, the withdrawal will mainly affect Russia's neighbours, since restrictions on the movement of troops on Russian territory will cease to apply.
Russia's objectives The CFE Treaty does not provide for participation to be suspended - it envisages only complete withdrawal under article XIX if exceptional circumstances occur.
The moratorium should be interpreted as another element of the pressure on the West, which Russia has been stepping up since early 2007.
The objective is to make Western countries accept Russia's proposals concerning the Treaty, and to force them to make concessions on other issues.
Russia's minimum objective as regards the CFE is apparently to have NATO member states ratify the 1999 Agreement on the adaptation of the CFE Treaty, and to persuade them to stop making the ratification conditional on the evacuation of Russian troops from Moldova and Georgia.
In this way, Russia seeks de facto recognition of its military presence in those countries' regions of unsolved conflicts.
The maximum objective, on the other hand, is to have the CFE Treaty revised again along the lines of Russia's suggestions presented at the Vienna conference in June.
Another motive behind Russia's suspension of CFE participation is to pressure the West on other issues concerning European security.
Moscow is attempting to deepen divisions between Europe and the United States by creating the impression that certain actions taken by the United States have had a detrimental effect on Europe's security.
It appears that the Kremlin hopes to prevent, or at least postpone, the deployment of the US missile shield in Central Eastern Europe by making the project the subject of dialogue between Russia, the US and Europe.
Russia also wants to prevent the possible accession of CIS countries, especially Georgia and Ukraine, to NATO - a project that the US administration supports.
International consequences Russia's decision to suspend participation in the CFE has spoiled its relations with Western countries.
If the Russian moratorium comes into force, and if Russia subsequently withdraws from the Treaty (which is likely if Western states do not make the concessions that Moscow expects), Russia will not be able to achieve its political goals.
Most reactions in Western states have demonstrated that the Kremlin has not in fact succeeded in causing a major split between Europe and the United States (for example, NATO has rejected Russia's proposal to negotiate a new treaty).
Even though the West is open to dialogue, there is little indication that Russian pressure could genuinely force Western countries to make concessions on European security issues.
At the same time, however, Russia's decision concerning the CFE adds credibility to its earlier threats concerning withdrawal from the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty, which might have more serious consequences for European security.
As regards the military dimension, it is unlikely that after putting the moratorium into effect, or even withdrawing from the CFE, Russia will start producing offensive weapons on a mass scale and exceed the limits imposed on it (there is no such need, due to the worldwide tendency to move from quantity to quality in armaments).
However, the Russian Federation will regain full freedom to deploy troops on its territory.
As a result, there will be no more exchange of information on the movement of troops, Russia will stop performing and hosting inspections, there will be no more supervision of troop movements on Russian territory in connection with redeployment or participation in large-scale military exercises, the restrictions on troop deployment on Russia's territory will cease to apply, and finally, it will be impossible to verify available information on the general changes in the organisation and size of particular military units in the European part of Russia.
This may have an adverse effect on the security situation on countries that border Russia and have no Satellite Reconnaissance Systems of their own, especially Poland and the Baltic states.
Co-operation: Andrzej Wilk
The current crisis partly stems from the gradual worsening of Russian-British relations, which started several years ago in connection with Russia's foreign and internal policy.
The absence of a firm reaction by the EU to the crisis shows that Moscow still has no need to fear a strong reaction from the European states.
Russia's reputation in the EU member states is eroding, but the EU is still unable to develop a coherent policy towards the Russian Federation.
The diplomatic crisis   On 16 July, the UK took radical measures in response to Russia's refusal to extradite Andrei Lugovoi, whom the British prosecution authorities suspect of assassinating Alexander Litvinenko, a British citizen and former FSB agent.
The British authorities said they would expel four Russian diplomats, suspend negotiations with Russia concerning visa facilitation for Russian nationals, revise the principles of bilateral co-operation in various fields, and stop any co-operation whatsoever with the Federal Security Service.
Russia responded on 19 July by declaring four British diplomats personae non gratae.
Moscow also announced that it would stop co-operating with Great Britain in the field of combating terrorism, and would refuse visas to British officials.
London's policy is backed by the United States' Department of State.
The British authorities have made it clear that they also expected support from their European partners, although only limited backing has been offered so far.
Portugal, which currently holds the EU presidency, expressed disappointment with the conduct of the Russian authorities.
Germany voiced cautious criticism of Russia; however, it also stated that a deterioration of Russian-EU relations should be avoided.
The foreign ministers of the EU member states meeting on 24 July only adopted an informative document on the UK's relations with Russia.
Initially, Russia pursued a dual tactic, on the one hand mitigating the impression of a crisis (the conciliatory statements by President Putin and foreign minister Lavrov), and on the other, testing the EU's possible reaction (Vladimir Chizhov, the Russian representative to the EU, warned that Brussels should not interfere with the Russian-British dispute, and Russian strategic bomber aircraft were being flown along British borders).
When the EU failed to react, the Russian president brutally attacked Great Britain on 24 July by voicing statements which included an accusation of "colonial thinking".
Russian-British problems   The current tension in Russian-British relations is a direct consequence of the assassination of Alexander Litvinenko in London in November 2006.
The UK was the first large European country to start criticising Russia's foreign and internal policy after an initial period of hopes for closer co-operation with Russia under Putin's rule.
The most important points of contention include the fact that London awards political asylum, or even citizenship, to persons regarded by the Kremlin as political opponents (the most widely known cases include that of oligarch Boris Berezovsky, the Chechen government official Akhmed Zakayev and Litvinenko himself).
Other factors include the British-American alliance, and London's support for the US presence in Europe.
The UK, on the other hand, is concerned about how the Russian authorities treat British investors (Shell has been deprived of a portion of its shares in the Sakhalin-2 project, while TNK-BP has been forced to sell its shares in the Kovyktin gas project).
In addition, London remains critical of Russia's energy policy and internal policy, including its attitude towards non-governmental organisations.
Influence of the crisis on Russian-EU relations   The policy which the Kremlin has been implementing recently in relation to Great Britain clearly demonstrates that Russia is less and less concerned about the possible reactions of European countries.
At the same time, in the field of foreign policy it has started to employ methods typical of its authoritarian internal policy, which obviously diverge from European standards.
Most European states have noted this fact, as a result of which the reputation of the Russian Federation is eroding.
However, in spite of this the EU's member states have failed to adopt a more unified line on Russia.
The conflict was provisionally resolved as the Belarusian leadership gave in to the Russian ultimatum, however, this can hardly be regarded as a lasting solution.
Russia is determined to consistently pursue a policy of pressuring Belarus, and meanwhile Minsk is facing increasing financial difficulties, which may engender more conflicts in the nearest future.
Attempts to postpone debt repayment With the agreements signed in late 2006 and early 2007 (see the Annex), Russia started to gradually withdraw the preferential terms of energy co-operation with Belarus.
Since gas accounts for as much as 75-80 percent of Belarus' energy mix, the twofold gas price increase to US$100 per 1000 m3 as of 1 January 2007 and the drastic decline of income from the processing and re-export of Russian oil and petroleum products have substantially reduced the Belarusian budget's revenues.
Although the agreement signed on 31 December 2006 envisaged a possibility for Belarus to pay 55 percent of the agreed gas price to 30 June 2007, the remaining 45 percent, i.e. a total of US$456.16 million, was to be paid by 23 July.
On 19 July, a Belarusian delegation was sent to Moscow to negotiate a further postponement of the repayment till the end of this year.
At the same time, the Belarusian leadership asked Russia to provide a stabilisation loan of US$1.5 billion for the repayment of debt, claiming that Belarus had no financial reserves for this purpose.
The Russians maintained that the Belarusian government did have the necessary funds.
The talks, interrupted and conducted at various levels between 19 and 30 July, failed to produce an agreement and were suspended.
Russia's ultimatum On 1 August Gazprom officially notified the Belarusian government that, as provided for in the agreement, it would reduce the volume of gas supplies to Belarus in proportion to the amount of debt, i.e. by 45 percent, if the debt were not repaid by 3 August.
On 2 August president Alyaksandr Lukashenka ordered a payment of US$460 million from the state reserve to be made to Gazprom.
On the same day, a delegation of Beltransgaz, the company operating gas pipelines in Belarus, arrived in Moscow.
After the talks, which continued for the whole night, on 3 August the parties agreed that Russia would suspend its decision to reduce the volume of supplies until 10:00 a.m. on 10 August, and in return Belarus has immediately repaid the first instalment of its debt, i.e.
US$190 million.
Objectives of Russia and Belarus Russia insists on keeping the new, "market-based" model of energy relations with Belarus.
At the same time it is stepping up pressure on Minsk in order to take over Belarusian petrochemical companies (the refineries in Mozir and Novapolatsk) and chemical plants (Polimir, Belshina, Grodno Azot) in order to control the strategic elements of the Belarusian economy.
It seems that Moscow also aims to discredit Minsk and undermine its reliability as a transit country in the eyes of Western partners.
The Belarusian leadership's objective is to postpone the privatisation of strategically important establishments (i.e. the acquisition of such companies by Russian capital) as much as possible, while at the same time equalising the balance of payments and stabilising the economy using the stabilisation loan among other measures.
In this manner, Alyaksandr Lukashenka wants to survive until the Russian presidential election in March 2008, hoping for better relations with the new Russian president.
Forecast Forcing Belarus to repay its debt is merely a provisional solution.
Since Minsk is facing mounting financial problems, and the Russians are apparently determined to enforce the new terms of co-operation, more tension over payments for the Russian gas supplies should be expected in the nearest future.
Serious problems may arise in late 2007 and early 2008, as the agreement concluded between Belarus and Russia provides that as of 1 January 2008, the price of gas will again be increased substantially (from US$100 currently to around US$160-180 per 1000 m3).
The Belarusian authorities are aware that if they admit Russian investors to Belarus on a larger scale or repay the gas debt with stakes in Belarusian enterprises, they will lose control of the strategic sectors of the economy.
Should that happen, they would also lose much of their influence on the political situation in Belarus.
This is why they have decided to repay the debt from their own funds.
That decision, however, involves lowering the amount of currency reserves and creates the risk that the balance of payments might break down.
In order to avert this threat, the Belarusian government will make every effort to obtain foreign loans.
If the fact that Russia increasingly pressures Belarus in order to take over control of the Belarusian petrochemical and chemical industry does not induce the Belarusian government to liberalise the economy, inter alia by creating favourable conditions for Western investors, Minsk will find itself in a lost position vis-?-vis Moscow.
Consequently, it will have to privatise the enterprises in question by selling them to Russian companies on conditions dictated by Russia.
Even more so as Alyaksandr Lukashenka's expectations concerning a change in Russia's policy after the presidential election do not seem to be justified.
ANNEX New terms of Russian-Belarusian economic co-operation in 2007 The gas sphere Before the end of 2006, Belarus was buying its gas from Russia at the most preferential conditions among all external buyers (US$46.68 per 1000 m3 from 2004, and before that a mere US$30).
In return, the Belarusian government had agreed to sell a 50 percent stake in Beltransgaz, a strategic company operating gas pipelines in Belarus, to Russia's Gazprom.
However, as the Belarusian leadership was postponing the final decision concerning the transaction, Russia decided to increase the price paid by Belarus to around US$200 per 1000 m3, within the general framework of adjusting gas prices paid by CIS countries to global levels.
Minsk was thus forced to make concessions.
Under the agreement concluded on 31 December 2006, the price of gas to be supplied in 2007 was increased to US$100 per 1000 m3, and it was agreed that in the following years, the price would be set depending on the average price in the European market (in 2008, it would be 67 percent of that average price).
Belarus was allowed to pay only 55 percent of the agreed price (US$ 55) in the first half of 2007, so that it could adapt to the new conditions.
An arrangement concluded on 18 May contained detailed provisions concerning the sale of a 50 percent stake in Beltransgaz to Gazprom, which had been initially agreed upon in the deal of 31 December 2006.
Belarus agreed to sell shares in Beltransgaz over the next four years in four 12.5 percent instalments for US$625 million each.
By 2010, Gazprom would thus have acquired half of the company.
In addition, one Gazprom representative would be appointed as a Beltransgaz management board member following the sale of each instalment, as a result of which in 2010 the Russians would make up half of the 8-person board.
Oil trade Before the end of 2006, the model of oil trade was very favourable for Belarus.
Oil export from Russia to Belarus was not subject to customs duties and the Belarusian budget retained all of the duties collected on oil exported from Belarus.
Since the Belarusian export duties were much lower than the Russian ones, it was much more profitable for Russian oil companies to export oil via Belarus and to outsource oil processing to Belarusian refineries.
In order to force Belarus to comply with the provisions of the customs agreement, i.e. to reduce the losses incurred by the Russian budget, the Russian government procured the signing, on 12 January 2007, of an agreement on the new terms of trade in Russian oil.
It was agreed that Belarus would increase its duties on oil and petroleum products to match Russian levels (currently US$200.6 per ton of oil), and that a duty of 0.293 of the current Russian tariff (i.e. currently around US$65) would be collected on the Belarusian-Russian border.
As a result, it became much less profitable to outsource oil processing to Belarus (currently the profit amounts to 1-2%).
In order to restore the former volume of trade and preserve the balance of payments the Belarusian government had to provide compensation for Russian oil companies and the refineries in Mozir and Novapolatsk, equal to 90 percent of the customs tariff at the Belarusian-Russian border.
Between January and April 2007, the value of Belarusian petroleum products exports has decreased by US$205.1 million (i.e. by around 8% compared to the same period last year), while the export of oil from Belarus' own resources stopped altogether.
According to the newest official data, this created a US$430 million decline in the value of exports in the first quarter of 2007.
The general balance of the energy sector in this period was minus US$504.1 million (compared to plus US$61.5 million in the same period of last year).
Trade exchange A customs union has been in place between Russia and Belarus since 1995, however, both countries have introduced numerous restrictions on the imports of various groups of commodities.
Belarus has created the greatest number of barriers, fearing that its market might be dominated by goods imported from Russia.
Under pressure from Russia, on 23 March in Minsk the two countries signed a agreement on economic and trade co-operation in which the Belarusian government pledged to lift restrictions on Russian exports of fish, tobacco, beer and other commodities by the end of 2007.
On its part, Russia simplified the procedures for the import of certain agreed quantities of Belarusian sugar (180 thousand tons in 2007, 100 thousand tons in 2008).
Apart from these declarations, various propaganda exercises have been taking place, of which the most prominent example has been the 'Peace Mission 2007' military exercise by the Shanghai Co-operation Organisation, which was held in mid-August and widely publicised by the Russian media.
Over the last few weeks, however, the Russian army has also been carrying out numerous other activities involving much larger forces and funds than the exercises mentioned above, but which have received much less media attention.
This indicates that the recent declarations by Russian politicians and military officers do in fact reflect their real intentions, and (in conditions of Russia's oil and gas prosperity) should be taken seriously.
The measures taken by Russia should primarily be seen as an attempt to pressure the United States in connection with the development of the US missile shield.
They are also an expression of the belief, which is increasingly popular among the Kremlin elite, that Russia's armed forces should not be merely effective, but also comparable in terms of tasks and structure to the Soviet army.
Finally, the domestic context of these actions is also quite clear: a vision of Russia rebuilding the military power it had back in Soviet times seems to be an attractive way to unite Russian society around President Putin and his circle.
Declarations Pledges to strengthen Russia's military potential are hardly a novelty in the country's political landscape.
Ever since President Putin's address at the Munich conference, such declarations have tended to fall back on militarist Cold War rhetoric.
Statements concerning the development of Russia's military have been particularly frequent in recent weeks, and have been accompanied by a number of related activities which the media covered widely.
August's wave of declarations and concrete measures was started by the address of the Russian Navy Commander-in-Chief Admiral Vladimir Masorin on 2 August in Sevastopol, Ukraine (the main base of Russia's Black Sea Fleet).
Admiral Masorin argued that the Russian fleet should once again be permanently stationed in the Mediterranean, as the Soviet navy used to be.
He also announced plans to expand the Black Sea Fleet to bring it near the size it had before the collapse of the Soviet Union (for example, by increasing the number of submarines from 2 to 12 or 15).
It is notable that in Masorin's view, the construction of the new Black Sea Fleet base in Novorossiysk is not a preparation for a Russian withdrawal from Sevastopol (the lease agreement for the base will expire in 2017).
In the days that followed, various Russian officials, including the Defence Minister Anatoly Serdyukov and the Air Force Commander-in-Chief General Alexander Zelin voiced further comments concerning the systematic growth of the Russian Armed Forces' military potential.
However, the most important declaration was made by President Vladimir Putin on 17 August in a press conference following the 'Peace Mission 2007' exercise.
Putin said that Russia would resume the regular sorties of strategic bombers beyond its territory - a practice abandoned in 1992 after the collapse of the USSR.
It might be worth adding that on 11 August, President Putin visited the new-generation radar station in Lekhtusi near St. Petersburg, which was put into operation in December 2006, and which forms part of Russia's projected missile and space defence system intended to counterbalance the US missile shield.
Propaganda Some of these activities were purely propaganda exercises, of negligible genuine importance for the development of Russian military potential.
This refers to the demonstrative flights of strategic bombers over the Arctic, Atlantic and Pacific Oceans (on 9 August, Russian strategic bombers were flown near the US base on the Island of Guam for the first time since the end of the Cold War), as well as the exercise of Russia's first, newly-formed mountain infantry unit on Mount Elbrus, and in particular the Shanghai Co-operation Organisation's 'Peace Mission 2007' exercise.
The latter has been given particular attention, starting from the preparatory phase to the redeployment in Russian territory of Chinese troops and units representing the four Central Asian states (a total of around 6,500 troops including 2,000 from Russia), and to the field training exercise phase on 9-17 August that was observed by the Shanghai Co-operation Organisation leaders.
Equally spectacular was the exercise by a company from the newly formed mountain infantry brigade.
Its scenario demonstrates the imperialist mentality of the Russian army commanders.
On 13 August, a fully equipped company stormed Mount Elbrus, the highest summit of the Caucasus (5642 metres), and during their descent, at around 4500 metres, fought a battle against a hypothetical enemy (using 82-mm mortars and other weapons).
A telling comment was expressed by General Valery Yevnevich, a deputy Commander in Chief of the Land Forces, who said: "As far as I know, no-one in the world has ever organised such shooting at this height".
Similar undertones can observed in the plan of events for this year's MAKS 2007 International Aviation & Space Salon in Zhukovsky near Moscow.
This year, for the first time the MAKS included a demonstration of midair combat by the training unit of the Air Force of the Russian Federation.
Reality In the shadow of these declarations and propaganda measures, classic military exercises have been taking place in all regions of Russia as part of the Armed Forces' summer training session.
They differed from the actions discussed above in that they attracted little media attention, and more importantly, involved much larger forces and funds.
Finally, the technological modernisation of the Russian army, which was initiated around 2005, has also been progressing.
Particularly worthy of attention were the exercises by the 37th Long Range (strategic) Air Force, which involved the demonstrative strategic bomber sorties mentioned above.
Two such exercises took place, on 7-9 August and 14-18 August.
The main element of the training focused on 'overcoming the missile defences' of a hypothetical enemy, consisting in the firing of winged missiles (the main armament of strategic bombers) at targets in the Pemboi range near Vorkuta.
It is notable that unlike the widely publicised 'raid' on the Guam base, the 'classic' sorties of Russian bombers during the latter exercise did in fact provoke negative reactions in the United States and Canada.
At the same time as the 'Peace Mission 2007', the largest exercise of the 61st Air Transport Army since the collapse of the USSR was held.
It involved a transport aviation division (30 aircraft) as well as units of the Air Landing Troops from the Leningrad Military District.
For comparison purposes, while the joint exercise of the Shanghai Co-operation Organisation involved the landing of 240 troops (Russia and China each accounting for half of this number), during the exercise of the 61st Army on 14 August around 1000 soldiers were landed at the same time.
The storming of Mount Elbrus mentioned above was one of the militarily less important training exercises organised during the period in question in the North Caucasus Military District.
The exercise of the 58th Army stationed in the region, which was held on 4-9 August, involved around 8,000 troops and 350 pieces of heavy military equipment (including combat aircraft and helicopters).
It is also worth mentioning that in mid-July, the 58th Army took part in anti-terrorist exercise, a training on a similar scale organised in the North Caucasus Military District.
Also worthy of attention were the exercise of the Air Force Special Purpose Command in the Ashuluk range in the Astrakhan Oblast (completed on 2 August), and the 'Combat Community 2007' exercise of the Joint CIS Air-Defence System (13-24 August).
A comparison with the latter exercise helps to show the 'Peace Mission 2007' exercise on the appropriate scale.
China and Russia sent eight combat aircraft each to the Shanghai Co-operation Organisation exercise, i.e. as many as Belarus provided for the CIS exercise, while the Air Force of the Russian Federation was represented in 'Combat Community 2007' by 22 aircraft.
The progress made over recent weeks in the field of technological modernisation is also important from the perspective of increasing Russia's military potential.
On 6 August, the first unit equipped with the S-400 air defence missile system started combat duty in the city of Elektrostal in the Moscow Oblast.
On 3 August, after many months of tests, the line unit received the first serially produced new generation Su-34 fighter bomber (the aircraft was officially provided to the army in late 2006); and on 16 August, the first upgraded Su-25SM close-support aircraft was delivered.
From the point of view of Poland's security, the operation (completed in August) to re-equip two regiments of the elite 2nd Guards Tamanskaya Motor Rifle Division deployed in the Moscow Military District with new T-90 tanks was also noteworthy.
As part of the Russian-Belarusian Regional Military Group, this unit practices redeployment on Belarusian territory, as well as battles with NATO forces.
Conclusions President Putin's statement on 17 August, in which he announced that Russia would restore the permanent duty of strategic bombers, provides a kind of link between the recent series of declarations on the one hand, and the measures taken by Russia to restore its lost military might and build the state's image as a military power on the other.
This effort has taken place at three levels: declarations, propaganda and real actions.
It is increasingly apparent that the Russian authorities aim to rebuild Russia's military power in the shape it had in Soviet times, namely with special roles for offensive nuclear forces, military bases located outside Russian territory, and militarist world-power propaganda.
The objective seems to be to oppose the military ambitions of the United States, including its plans to develop a missile defence system, and to persuade the US administration to extend the START I Treaty.
Finally, the emphasis on military power is also important in terms of internal politics as a symbolic conclusion to Vladimir Putin's presidency, which is now drawing to a close.
cooperation: Marta Jaroszewicz, Małgorzata Zarębska
US$6 billion more than the company's total debt to the tax services and creditors.
The Russian state-owned oil company Rosneft turned out to have benefited most from the Yukos bankruptcy, as it had taken over most of the company's assets.
The sale of Yukos changed the balance of power in the Russian oil sector; the state expanded its presence and strengthened its role in the sector at the expense of private companies.
At the same time, the attack against Yukos served as a demonstration of the Kremlin's power, and forced private businesses to be loyal to the government.
Tenders for the sale of assets The most important assets sold in tenders (of which the first took place in December 2004) were the Yukos production companies, Yuganskneftegaz, Tomskneft and Samaraneftegaz.
The buyer (Rosneft) paid a total of US$25.2 billion, which was far below the companies' real value.
The greatest surprise came with the sale of the Moscow headquarters of Yukos and its oil trade intermediaries and trading house.
Rosneft competed for these assets with Prana, an unknown company that finally offered nearly five times the initial price, i.e. around US$4 billion.
Who benefits from the Yukos bankruptcy?
Its Board of Directors Chairman Igor Sechin was said to be the main inspiration behind the attack against Yukos.
Rosneft took over nearly all the post-Yukos oil assets, either by winning tenders directly or by re-buying (even at inflated prices) from the original winners (Prana, and Yunitex, the latter of which had purchased the assets located in the European part of Russia).
Gazprom, on the other hand, took over control of Yukos' gas assets (including the Arcticgaz and Urengoil gas companies) by using the Italian companies Enel and ENI as intermediaries (see Appendix).
Conclusion By taking over the assets of the bankrupt Yukos, Rosneft was transformed from a medium-sized oil company into the sector leader in terms of both production and capital.
This was possible thanks to the Kremlin's support.
The company faced practically no problems in taking over the assets it wanted at bargain prices, as the state authorities either refused to admit potential rivals to the tenders, or declined any authorisation for takeovers of the assets sold.
The Kremlin-inspired bankruptcy of Yukos has certainly also contributed to the achievement of the Russian government's wider economic strategy.
Its objective is for the state to take over control of the most profitable sectors, such as the oil sector in this case, and subordinate them to the needs of the state and the interests of the Kremlin clans.
This de facto re-nationalisation has not been limited to the oil sector, but has also been extended to other sectors such as the machine-building, automotive and aviation industries.
As a result of the ownership changes following the sale of Yukos, the state has significantly expanded its presence in the oil sector.
At present, nearly 40 percent of oil in Russia is produced by state-owned companies, compared to 16 percent in 2003.
The bankruptcy and sale of Yukos also provided certain people associated with the ruling elite with opportunities to multiply their private fortunes.
In addition to earning millions for consulting services, it was also possible to make huge profits by having sham intermediaries participate in the tenders.
For example, by reselling some of their acquisitions to Rosneft, the owners of Yunitex earned around US$150 million in the space of three weeks.
The takeover of Yukos is unlikely to end the re-division of property in the Russian oil sector.
The Yukos case has been followed by other attempts to take away assets from private owners (such as Russneft).
However, any further domestic expansion of state-owned companies will require support from the Kremlin.
This is why the balance of power that will emerge from the upcoming parliamentary and presidential elections is so important for the oil sector.
Appendix The most important tenders for Yukos assets 1.
December 2004: the mail production company Yuganskneftegaz.
A block of shares (76.79%) was purchased in December 2004 by a mysterious buyer, Baikalfinansgroup of Tver, for a 'bargain' price of US$9.3 billion (various auditors had estimated the company's value at US$18-30 billion).
A week later, Baikalfinansgroup itself was acquired by the Russian state-owned oil company Rosneft.
April 2007: the tender for a package of assets including a 20 percent stake in Sibneft (currently Gazpromneft) and the gas companies Arcticgaz and Urengoil was the only one in which Gazprom took part indirectly (it was represented by two Italian energy companies, ENI and Enel, which participated in the tender directly as a way to legitimise the transaction).
The two companies took over the assets offered for a price of under US$6 billion.
Under the agreement concluded with Gazprom, the Italian intermediaries were supposed to resell at least 51 percent of all assets acquired, and their entire stake in Gazpromneft, to the Russian gas monopoly.
April 2007: Promregionholding, an unknown company probably linked with LUKoil won the tender for post-Yukos assets in the Kuban region (in particular, fuel bases and a chain of petrol stations), as well as shares in a regional pipeline network and the Caspian Oil Company.
May 2007: the remaining production companies: Tomskneft and Samaraneftegaz, and their transmission and trade facilities as well as processing infrastructure (including four refineries) were sold to Neft-Aktiv (a Rosneft company), again at a major discount, i.e. for around US$13 billion.
May 2007: fuel bases, a network of petrol stations and river terminals in the European part of Russia were purchased by an unknown company, Yunitex, for US$ 500 million.
The fact that the Federal Antimonopoly Service authorised the transaction, as well as the links between the Yunitex CEO and Gazprombank, may suggest that the company could win the tender owing to its relations with the gas monopoly, or even that it represented Gazprom itself.
Three weeks later, Yunitex sold most of the assets purchased to Rosneft for around US$650 million.
May 2007: the fact that an anonymous company, Prana (registered in the Seychelles), defeated Rosneft in the tender for the Moscow headquarters of Yukos, its intermediary companies and the Yukos trading house, was the biggest surprise of the sale process.
A record bid was made at this tender (nearly US$4 billion, starting from US$850 million).
It is still unclear whom Prana represented; commentators suspect the company has links to Gazprombank.
However, Prana has agreed to resell some of the assets purchased to Rosneft for around US$3.6 billion.
August 2007: no state-owned Russian company took part in the final tender for Yukos Finance B.V., which was the owner of a 49 percent stake in Transpetrol, the Slovak oil transmission company.
The tender was won by Promneftstroy (it offered more than US$300 million), a company with unclear connections, and which is most probably associated with Rosneft or Gazpromneft.
The reluctance of Russian state-owned companies to directly participate in the tender was probably due to the unclear legal status of Yukos Finance and the lawsuits concerning the company, which are pending in Dutch courts
Despite the loud propaganda surrounding the meeting, the summit failed to produce any significant results.
This was largely due to differences between Russia and China concerning the direction of the SCO's future development.
While Moscow wishes to focus on geopolitics and regional security, Beijing is more interested in internal security and developing economic co-operation.
Because of the scale of these differences, the SCO is unlikely to transform into an anti-Western military alliance, and so equally unlikely to achieve real economic integration.
Results of the summit The multilateral treaty signed by the summit members supplements the SCO Charter adopted in 2002, but in practice, it changes little about the Organisation's functioning.
The Treaty emphasises the right of states to choose their own political systems (Article 3), the inviolability of borders (Article 5) and the ambition to expand the areas of multilateral co-operation, and also declares that member states shall not participate in alliances directed against other SCO members (Article 4) as well as providing for consultations in the event of a threat (Article 6).
Nevertheless, it remains a propaganda document.
The Bishkek Declaration contains veiled criticism of the United States.
However, in contrast to earlier declarations, the meeting has not been simply an anti-American demonstration.
Neither questions of the US military presence in the region nor global issues such as missile defence were raised (except for a mention in the speech by the president of Iran, who had been invited to the summit as a guest).
Finally, even though the president of Turkmenistan was present at the summit, and contrary to the expectations of Russian commentators, no arrangements were made for close co-operation between the SCO and Ashgabat.
The disparate visions of Moscow and Beijing The results of the summit were unimpressive primarily because of Moscow and Beijing's divergent interests.
From Moscow's point of view, the SCO should be a means to demonstrate Russia's ability to form a political and military alliance that would counterbalance US influence.
Moscow also wants to use the Organisation to limit China's freedom to operate in the region, for example by focusing attention on the fight against terrorism, further enlargement of the Organisation, and by promoting the idea of an energy club and co-ordinating national policies in this sphere.
China, on the other hand, views the SCO as a way to pursue its own interests in the internal security sphere, namely the fight against separatism, although economic issues are at the same time a priority for Beijing.
China expects the SCO to enable it to enter the energy markets of countries in the region, and to ensure independent supplies of energy resources from countries other than Russia.
In addition, the Organisation is intended to serve the objectives of China's economic expansion in the region, as for now the most important objective (which nevertheless is unlikely to come about) being the formation of a free trade zone.
Finally, China wants Russia to take over the burden of competing with the United States in Central Asia.
Prospects for the SCO's development Russia failed to persuade its partners in the SCO to support its policy against the United States, either in Central Asia (the question of military bases), or globally (the US-planned missile shield).
Rivalry over resources and fears of China's dominance, on the other hand, are hindering any possible economic integration.
This is evidenced for example by the difficulties with using the US$900 million credit granted by China to Central Asian states for joint projects and purchases of Chinese goods.
Because the interests of Moscow and Beijing are so divergent, the SCO is more likely to become a way to channel the regional rivalry between Russia and China than to form an anti-Western alliance.
The findings of the Western missions clearly indicated that Russia was responsible for the incident, while the Russian mission concluded that the event was a Georgian provocation.
The incident caused a further worsening of the already extremely complicated relations between Georgia and Russia.
Its objective seems to have been to demonstrate - primarily to the West, but also to the Georgian government - that Moscow is determined to defend its interests in the region, and by doing so, to discourage Georgia's Western partners from building closer relations with the country, and in particular from admitting Georgia to NATO.
The cautious reactions to the incident in the West seem to corroborate Moscow's intuitions.
It is possible that tension between Georgia and Russia will continue and increase.
The incident The Georgian version, which has been confirmed by two independent Western missions, is as follows: one military aircraft (probably a Su-24) violated Georgian airspace three times, and on the final occasion launched a Raduga Kh-58 anti-radar guided missile from a distance of around 10 km at the village of Shavshebi, which since last November has been the location of a Georgian-purchased modern radar facility.
The radar station crew acted in accordance with the procedures, immediately turning the radar off.
The missile lost aim and fell, without exploding, onto the village of Tsitelubani around 5 km from the radar.
The aircraft turned back and left Georgian airspace on its way back to Russia.
The Russian authorities (and the Russian investigation mission) have firmly denied this version, accusing the Georgian authorities of feigning the incident (see Appendix 1 for the findings of the four investigation missions).
The incident has sparked a political storm that has been ongoing for several weeks now.
Tbilisi claims that the Russians are responsible for the provocation.
As Moscow firmly denies these allegations and maintains that the Georgian government is responsible for the incident (according to the Russian authorities, the provocation was designed to increase tension in the regions of the Ossetian and Abkhazian conflicts and to discredit Russia internationally, as was the stance expressed by the Russian Foreign Ministry on 7 August), Georgia has requested that the UN Security Council deal with the case.
However, the Russian representative in the UN SC has blocked both the statement condemning the launching of a missile at Georgia and the decision for the Security Council to investigate the case.
The incident led to serious concern in the West, with the OSCE, the Council of Europe and other organisations issuing respective statements.
The US Administration took the strongest stance, stating that the incident was an argument in favour of admitting Georgia to NATO as soon as possible.
The OSCE has also dealt with the case - its Chairman appointed the former Croatian foreign minister Miomir Žužul as his personal representative for the incident.
Žužul went to Tbilisi on 20-21 August and to Moscow on 22-24 August; the consultations are supposed to continue.
The incident in the context of Russian-Georgian relations The relations between the two states have been in very bad shape for a long time.
Russia's primary strategic objective towards Georgia is to prevent the country from becoming completely independent of Moscow and integrating with the Euro-Atlantic system (i.e. by attaining NATO membership, and regarding the possible subsequent deployment of NATO forces in Georgia).
To this end, Russia has been using very powerful economic pressure (including gas pressure, a transport blockade and an embargo on Georgian goods), playing off the conflicts in Abkhazia and South Ossetia against Georgia and finally, occasionally resorting to threats and pressure of a military nature (see Appendix 2).
Russia is attempting to provoke Georgia to undertake armed actions, especially in the conflict regions, which would undermine its image in the West as reliable and stable state pursuing a responsible policy.
So far, these measures have in principle proved ineffective, as Georgia has not yielded to economic pressure and is avoiding entering any open armed conflict.
Russia's objectives behind the Tsitelubani incident The missile 'attack' against the Georgian radar station is in line with the logic of Russia's policy on Georgia, but at the same time it signals a toughening of this policy.
It is difficult to determine whether the missile that fell on Tsitelubani had been deliberately left unarmed and was only meant to have a psychological effect, or whether it was meant to destroy the radar station (which would constitute an act of direct aggression) and provoke a military response from Tbilisi that would have been doomed to fail (for example, in the region of the Ossetian conflict), but failed to explode as a result of a technical defect.
Whichever the case, Russia's objective was to demonstrate its power and determination as regards Georgia, and to discourage the West from trying to further undermine Russia's interests in that country.
Moscow may actually have achieved its provisional objectives: Western reactions have been limited to verbal and symbolic measures (the investigation missions), while Georgia has to cope with a real, unfavourable balance of power in its relations with Russia.
What next?
There are no signs that would justify any hope that tension between Russia and Georgia will ease up.
Further clashes between the two states should be expected in all contentious matters (especially as regards the Ossetian and Abkhazian conflict regions, as well as economic issues).
It is very probable that Russia will perpetrate more military incidents (either actions in the conflict regions, or ones such as the recent missile incident) in order to provoke Tbilisi into taking retaliatory action.
The steps Russia takes will probably be discreet and deliberately ambiguous, the point being not to give the international community a clear reason to take a firmly anti-Russian position.
In particular, Russia might take more serious military measures if, for instance, a Russian aircraft were downed over Georgia, Georgian troops attacked Russian forces (including the so-called peacekeeping force) in the conflict region, or if Georgia undertook a military offensive in a conflict region, which would 'justify' Russian retaliation and make Tbilisi responsible for the escalation of the conflict.
The temperature of Russian-Georgian tensions is and will remain very closely linked to the position of the West, and the Western community will therefore have to define its interests in the Caucasus and proceed consistently and cautiously.
Russia will step up its pressure on Georgia both in the case of declarations (unsupported by concrete actions) concerning Georgia's membership in NATO, for example, and also in the case of any signs of a weakening of the Western political presence in the Caucasus.
Co-operation: Marek Menkiszak, Andrzej Wilk  Appendix 1 International investigation missions The Joint Monitoring Group composed of representatives of the Russian Federation, North Ossetia - Alania (a subject of the Russian Federation) and Georgia, accompanied by an OSCE representative, was the first to examine the incident (starting work on 7 August).
The mission focused on collecting testimonies from the local population, soldiers of the Mixed Peace Corps stationed in the area, and others.
Its report contained no conclusions as to whether the missile had been abandoned or launched, or by whom.
The International Expert Group, composed of eight military experts representing Lithuania, Latvia, Sweden and the USA, worked on the site between 12 and 14 August.
Its report stated that an aircraft coming from Russia had violated Georgian airspace three times and launched (rather than abandoned, as suggested previously) a missile.
The report emphasised that the Georgian air force has no aircraft capable of carrying this type of missiles.
The Russian mission, composed of 26 Russian Defence Ministry officials and diplomats, examined the site where the missile fell, and its remnants deposited in Tbilisi, on 16-17 August.
The Russian experts concluded that on the day in question, the Russian-Georgian border had only been crossed by several passenger planes; the authenticity of the Georgian radar records was unreliable; Georgia had destroyed the key piece of evidence, namely the missile's head (the head was secured, photographed and detonated in a military range); the missile may have been buried there by the Georgians and need not necessarily have been dropped from an aircraft; not all the missile fragments stored in Tbilisi come from a Raduga Kh-58 missile - there are also pieces of other missiles.
The conclusion of the Russian mission was clear: the incident was a Georgian provocation designed to damage Russia's international image.
The Second Independent International Expert Group was a five-member mission composed of representatives of the United Kingdom, Estonia and Poland, which examined the incident on 18-19 August.
This mission's report is the most comprehensive and detailed of all of those issued.
It states among other things that the information provided by the Russians does not confirm their version of events; Georgian airspace had been violated three times by one aircraft; at least two of these violations involved flights towards the Georgian radar station; the missile was launched in the direction of the radar station from a distance of about 10 km; if the radar station had been the target, it was at the lower limit of the missile's range; immediately after the missile had been launched, the radar station crew turned the radar off in accordance with current procedures; the missile fell around 5 km from the radar, without exploding; it was a Russian-produced Raduga Kh-58 air-to-surface anti-radar missile with 1992 serial numbers; the Georgian air force does not have the capability to carry missiles of this type, and Georgia had probably never had a missile of this kind.
Appendix 2 Violations of Georgian airspace by Russian army planes and helicopters in the period 1999-2007 Russian army planes and helicopters have repeatedly violated Georgian airspace ever since armed operations started in the North Caucasus in the summer of 1999 (in August in Dagestan, and in September in Chechnya).
Initially (1999-2000), the violations were directly related to the ongoing military operation.
When the regular military actions had finished, the Russian air force started to target the regions in Georgia that bordered Chechnya, and especially the Pankisi Gorge; the Georgian government had no real control of the area, which allowed Chechen guerrillas to establish a stronghold there.
Russian-Georgian relations became particularly tense in the context of the bombings which the Russian air force carried out in 2002.
In the following years, as the Chechen guerrilla force was defeated, the activity of the Russian military air force on the Georgian border systematically decreased.
Apart from the incidents connected with the operation in Chechnya, Russian military planes and helicopters have repeatedly violated Georgian airspace in connection with the support that Russia is providing to Abkhazia and South Ossetia, the two Georgian provinces that are de facto independent of Tbilisi.
This is the context of the majority of incidents that have taken place from 2004 onwards.
The most serious one in the opinion of the Georgian Interior Ministry took place on 11 March 2007, when three Russian combat helicopters shot at Georgian administration buildings in the Kodori Valley (in the Abkhazian conflict region).
Since 1999, the Georgian authorities have reported a total of 33 violations of Georgian airspace by Russian army aircraft.
The Russians usually claim that their craft have not crossed the Russian Federation's border, or deny that any military plane or helicopter flights took place at the times reported by the Georgian authorities.
It is noteworthy that the Russian military air force uses air corridors over Georgia for flights to and from the Russian army base in Armenia.
During the period in question, the Georgian government has twice imposed temporary limitations on Russian flights along this route (in 2000 and 2006), and lodged one protest (in June 1999, when four Russian MiG-29 fighters were flown to Armenia, despite the fact that the Georgians had refused permission for the use of the air corridor at that time).
At the same time, by delaying the succession issue and tidying up the political scene, the president opened new possibilities of action for himself.
It seems that in the nearest future Astana will intensify its activity to use the political and economic potential of Kazakhstan to a fuller extent in the international arena.
Pre-succession disputes As recently as several months ago, the principal issue in the political system of Kazakhstan based on domination by the president was the counterbalancing of the positions of various groups of influence by Nursultan Nazarbaev, while succession to the presidency was at the pivot of political life.
The strongest positions were held by two competitive groups headed by the president's sons-in-law Rakhat Aliev (Dariga's husband) and Timur Kulibaev (Dinara's husband).
However, the pre-succession rivalry between the two groups had become so destructive (allegations against Aliev of brutal behind-the-scenes games, including killing of the opposition leader Sarsenbaev and kidnapping two executives of Nurbank) that further escalation of tension could pose a threat to the state security.
Dangerous was both the very fact of intensifying conflict and the feeling of threat which it caused among the elites who were not directly involved in the dispute and were just witnesses and victims of the increasingly brutal methods used in the political struggle.
Evolution of the system In the existing situation the president was forced to carry out changes in order to gain stronger control of the political system, eliminate the most dangerous players from it and put aside the ticklish problem of succession.
By amending the constitution (this May) Nursultan Nazarbaev gained the possibility to be president for life and gave a clear message that disputes about the candidate to his successor were premature.
The amended constitution also let the president to become the leader of the biggest party Nur Otan (700,000 members), which had come to existence in effect of a merger of the key parties in the country.
Nursultan Nazarbaev manipulated the election process so that the opposition did not win a single mandate in the parliament, a situation which has happened in Kazakhstan for the first time since the early 1990s.
Moreover, this parliament consists of members of only one party, so Nursultan Nazarbaev can exert influence on the parliament's decisions both as the head of the country and as the chairman of the only party in the parliament.
Parliamentary mandates have become a sort of a licence authorising to participate in political life; they have been granted only to verified and loyal associates of the president.
The deputies in the 107-seat Majilis include among others 20 former members of the presidential administration, government and other central authorities and nearly 20 representatives of local authorities.
Among the new MPs only one former member of Asar party can be found (the party was founded by Rakhat Aliev's wife, Dariga Nazarbaeva, to merge with the presidential Otan party last year).
This way the parliament in its new shape has become an even more convenient tool for the president to control any political processes taking place in Kazakhstan.
The amended constitution grants more powers to the parliament; the candidate to the post of prime minister is approved by the parliament, and it has an influence on the nominations of members of the Central Elections Committee and of the Constitutional Court.
However, considering the existing practice of governing Kazakhstan, the changes are merely formal; no one will dare to enforce their powers contrary to the president's will.
At the same time, in case of a sudden decease of the president (as it was in the case of Niyazov), the reinforced parliament will have a chance to be a stabiliser both in the succession process and on the political scene.
In parallel to the formal and legal changes, Nursultan Nazarbaev made some radical steps; he removed from the political scene of Kazakhstan his both sons-in-law, who had for a long time been believed to be the most likely candidates to take over the president's legacy.
Rakhat Aliev, who had been a dangerous and insubordinate player, was dismissed this May from the post of Kazakhstan's ambassador in Austria and to OSCE and indicted (the charges include participation in kidnapping and dirty money laundering).
A campaign was launched against him in the Kazakh media, and his wife Dariga was inclined by the president to divorce him, which came as the final confirmation that Rakhat Aliev irreversibly left the Kazakh political scene.
Immediately after the election, the president dismissed from the post of deputy CEO of the strategic holding Samruk his second son-in-law Timur Kulibaev, who was the main rival of Rakhat Aliev.
The dispute between Kulibaev and the energy minister over Kashagan, the largest Kazakh oilfield (since the Italian Eni concern had failed to comply with contract conditions, the energy minister wanted to impose heavier levies on the concern, while the head of Samruk demanded changing the operator), seems to have been used as a pretext for his dismissal.
The fact that both of them had been trying to push through their own ideas without consulting the president could irritate Nazarbaev.
Timur Kulibaev has been forced to recede by the president.
Consequently, he is the player who has the second largest (after the president) political and financial support in Kazakhstan and he may come back to the political scene when Nursultan Nazarbaev sees that convenient.
Summary Nursultan Nazarbaev tidied up and settled down the Kazakh political scene by putting off the resolution of the ticklish succession problem and neutralising the two major pretenders to presidency.
The president has shown once more that he controls the situation and the political processes in the country.
Strengthening control over the internal situation will let President Nazarbaev take steps to use the political and economic potential of Kazakhstan to a fuller extent.
It can be expected in the nearest future that President Nazarbaev will take actions to increase incomes generated by the energy sector.
In this context the issue of energy co-operation with Turkmenistan and, as a consequence, the dynamic game Kazakhstan has to play with Russia, China and the West, gain first priority.
Growing engagement in regional policy (the recent visit to Kyrgyzstan and the visits to Turkmenistan and Tajikistan to be paid in the nearest future) will let Kazakhstan better use its dominating economic and political position in the region.
This election scenario may win the support of a major part of the Russian elite.
If Putin remains the chief decision maker, the status quo will be preserved, and members of the power elite will be able to keep their current positions and influence.
Zubkov to be a 'technical' president?
Recent events in Russia suggest that the decision concerning Vladimir Putin's succession has been taken in the Kremlin.
The plan seems to be to have a puppet presidential successor, who would be controlled by Vladimir Putin and his circle.
In this arrangement, Putin would keep real power even after formally leaving office.
Thus, the election would be not so much a process for the succession of power as a mechanism designed to allow the current president to stay in charge.
Given the fact that Viktor Zubkov was designated head of government five months before the presidential election, which is planned for 2 March 2008, and in the light of the support that Vladimir Putin has publicly offered him, the new prime minister should be regarded as the most serious candidate to succeed the current president.
This possibility appears even more probable in the context of Zubkov's own declarations (which were undoubtedly pre-arranged with the president) that he might take part in the presidential election.
Zubkov is therefore the first among the many presidential candidates identified by the media to have actually publicly confirmed his intention to run for president.
The scenario in which a weak president will be elected and real power will remain with Vladimir Putin is further corroborated by the fact that the person nominated as prime minister belongs to Putin's inner circle, but at the same time has no major personal ambitions, and is close to retirement age (Zubkov is 66).
Putin himself has publicly confirmed that he is willing to actively participate in Russian politics after 2008, and said he was sure that the next president would ask him for advice.
This statement may be interpreted as a signal to the ruling elite that Putin indeed intends to hold on to real power.
If Zubkov is elected, this will not preclude Putin's return to power after one, possibly incomplete, term served by the new president; in Zubkov's case, the possibility that the new head of state will try to strengthen his position at the expense of Putin and prevent the latter from returning to the Kremlin is minimal.
Preconditions of the 'puppet president' scenario The Kremlin elite's support for the nominated successor is a key condition which must be met in order for the election scenario chosen by Putin to materialise.
It would be in the interest of most members of the elite if Putin remained the principal decision maker and if the status quo were preserved, as this would offer a guarantee that most factions would retain their current positions and influence.
Possible opponents of Zubkov will therefore probably be in the minority.
The decision to select Zubkov as Vladimir Putin's successor will also require a major effort to promote him, since the new PM has not been widely known to the public so far.
However, given the close control that the Kremlin exercises over the media and the election process, it should be expected that Zubkov's popularity will grow quite rapidly (as was the case with the other candidates to succeed whom Putin had previously promoted).
An additional advantage for Zubkov comes from the fact that the polls invariably indicate that a large percentage of voters intend to vote for the candidate officially supported by Vladimir Putin.
A separate question in the 'technical president' scenario concerns how Vladimir Putin will ensure that he retains his current influence.
When his term expires in May 2008, Putin will probably take an important state function, for example, as head of Gazprom or secretary of the Security Council, although his primary objective will be to maintain informal influence on the new president.
The fact that Zubkov is old, has no personal ambitions and is loyal to Putin will make this task easier.
Forecast Due to the unpredictability of the Russian system of power, unexpected moves concerning the election are always possible, although the prospect of Viktor Zubkov being 'anointed' as Vladimir Putin's successor is probable.
Zubkov's presidency may be a period of rule by a 'puppet president' with Vladimir Putin as an eminence grise controlling the head of state, and with the Kremlin coteries holding strong position and co-deciding on important questions.
Such a strengthening of the informal and covert power structures may widen the gap, observed during Putin's rule, between the letter of the law and the practical exercise of power.
Real power would thus continue to be transferred from the institutions in which the constitution is vested it to the political and business clans associated with the Kremlin, which are emerging and growing in strength.
If Zubkov takes office as president, the Russian Federation will probably continue its current policy line, including relations with Poland - the new president will come from the same political and social milieu as Putin, and his policy will therefore be oriented towards the same objectives: to strengthen Russia's international position using its energy and military potential among other means, to tighten control of the strategically important economic sectors, and to maintain decisive influence over social and political life in Russia.
Appendix Who is Viktor Zubkov?
Between 2001 and his nomination as prime minister, Viktor Zubkov served as chief of the Federal Financial Monitoring Service, in other words, Russia's financial intelligence agency.
He has knowledge of financial flows in Russia, illegal transactions and corruption cases, some of which involve highest-ranking politicians.
This knowledge might be used to blackmail certain groups in the power structures, or their individual representatives.
Zubkov's experience may also be used to launch propagandistic anti-corruption campaigns intended to boost his popularity.
Until the end of the 1980s, Zubkov had held managerial positions in sovkhozes (collective farms) in the Leningrad Oblast, and in the Communist Party.
Between 1992 and 1993 he was Vladimir Putin's deputy in the International Co-operation Committee of the St. Petersburg Mayor's Office, where he was regarded as a trusted colleague of the future president.
Subsequently, he was appointed deputy director and then director of the Federal Fiscal Service's St. Petersburg division.
He held this position until 2001, and between 1999 and 2001 he simultaneously served as deputy minister for taxes.
Zubkov was born in 1941.
He is regarded as a very cautious, discreet and disciplinary civil servant who does not accept bribes.
He remains close to the St. Petersburg circle of President Putin and is also associated with the so-called 'power group' in the Kremlin (Viktor Ivanov and Viktor Cherkesov), and with the former "Ozero" Construction Co-operative, an informal group comprising a number of people from the top levels of politics and business in Russia.
His son-in-law Anatoly Serdyukov used to be defence minister in Mikhail Fradkov's government (until 18 September).
If adopted, the new regulations would not only seriously hinder Gazprom's expansion in Europe, but also undo the objectives that the monopoly has already achieved in the EU market.
The proposals have been criticised in Russia, although most commentators believe that they are unlikely to come into force.
Proposals presented by the European Commission Some of the regulations proposed by the EC have been interpreted in Russia as an attempt to stop Gazprom's expansion into Europe, as the new rules are intended to apply in an equal manner to third-country companies operating on the EU market.
The provision which hits Gazprom's interests particularly badly is the principle of unbundling ownership of electricity and gas production on the one hand, and transmission operations on the other.
In practice, this means that no operator will be able to simultaneously control energy production, transport and distribution.
The EC proposal introduces a stricter regime as compared to the previous directive of 2003, which has been in force in the EU since 1 July 2007, and which provides for the unbundling of transport and production operations between different legal entities, while allowing them to form integrated enterprises.
The Commission's proposal also envisages a principle of reciprocity under which third-country companies will not have access to European assets unless the third countries concerned grant EU companies the same degree of access to their respective assets.
The proposed regulations also impose certain limitations concerning the acquisition of controlling stakes in independent transport companies, applicable to both EU and third-country enterprises.
The commission will have the right to intervene in such transactions if the acquiring company is directly or indirectly controlled by an energy-producing company.
Moreover, a third-country enterprise will not be allowed to acquire control of EU gas and electricity networks unless the third country concerned has concluded a special intergovernmental agreement with the EU.
Finally, the EC proposal also provides for the establishment of special institutions to monitor the implementation of the new directives and regulations, and to oversee compliance with the competition rules.
Possible impact of the new regulations on Gazprom If put into practice, the EC legislative proposals would both seriously jeopardise Gazprom's plans for expansion in Europe and also undermine the positions that the company has already achieved in the EU markets.
In many of them, Gazprom is not only the main supplier of gas, and sometimes even the only one, but it also owns or co-owns transport and distribution infrastructures.
The monopoly would have to sell these assets or spin them off into separate companies managed by independent operators.
This would undo the strategy that the company has been pursuing for the last few years to dominate all segments of the EU gas market (production, transport and distribution).
Russia's reaction Given the scale of the potential threat, so far the reactions in Russia have been quite moderate.
The media, which alleged that the EC's motivation was political, expressed two kinds of warnings to the EU.
Firstly, the reciprocity principle provided for in the EC proposal (concerning the conditions of access to European assets for third-country companies) was interpreted by many commentators as retaliation for the Russian legislation which imposes limitations on foreign investments in strategic enterprises and sectors (the first reading of this bill took place at the State Duma on 14 September 2007).
However, this law, upon which work started some time ago, will only provide legal validation for the practice of discriminating against foreign investors, which has been applied in Russia for the last few years.
Secondly, the proposals were perceived as the EU's payback for Russia's refusal to ratify the Energy Charter.
Veiled threats of retaliatory action on Russia's part (such as a possible price increase) appeared only in a statement by a Gazprom representative, who said that the company would assess the impact of the new regulations on the reliability of supplies and gas prices for Europe following a careful analysis of the proposals.
Russia's rather calm reactions to the EC proposals (at least in the public forum) may be due to the fact that most Russian experts believe that the drafts are highly unlikely to come into force in their present form.
Under the EU procedures, legislative initiatives of the European Commission must be approved by the European Parliament and the Council, and the new regulations will not come into force until 2010.
By that time, the EC proposals may have undergone major adjustments.
There is already some uncertainty concerning the adoption of the new regulations, mainly because of opposition inside the EU; the EC proposals have already been questioned by EU companies which are monopolies in their respective markets, including Germany's E.ON, Italy's ENI and France's Gaz de France, and have also been criticised by German and French government officials.
Most of Russian analysts also believe that the EC's proposals are a tactical move designed to improve the EU's bargaining position in relation to Russia.
The most important changes are the following: the finance minister Alexei Kudrin has been upgraded to the rank of deputy prime minister; German Gref has been replaced as the minister for economic development and trade by his former aide Elvira Nabiullina; regional development minister Vladimir Yakovlev has been replaced by the former presidential envoy to the Southern Federal District Dmitri Kozak; and Mikhail Zurabov has been replaced as the minister for healthcare and social development by former deputy finance minister Tatiana Golikova.
Defence minister Anatoly Serdyukov (a son-in-law of the new PM, who resigned when Zubkov was named head of government) retained his position.
The competences of the Ministry of Regional Development have been strengthened; two new committees have been created within the government (for fisheries and for youth), and the financial monitoring service (which until recently was led by Viktor Zubkov) was directly subordinated to the prime minister and is no longer controlled by the Ministry of Finance.
Even though it took rather a long time to determine the new cabinet's composition, the changes are small and do not affect the balance of power in the ruling elite.
The most notable modification consisted in the promotions of economists with liberal views.
This will not increase their influence on economic processes in Russia, but should rather be seen as a propaganda signal addressed to the international community and designed to improve Russia's image.
The Tymoshenko Bloc and Our Ukraine together garnered more votes than the Party of Regions.
According to the latest, still incomplete election results, the Tymoshenko Bloc and Our Ukraine had a joint showing of around 45 percent of the votes, while the Party of Regions together with with the Communists and the Lytvyn Bloc won around 43.4 percent of the votes.
The initial distribution of parliamentary seats suggests that the former two groups will have a sufficient majority to form a coalition which, nevertheless, may only be formally established in November, once the new parliament has been formed.
The ballot and its results According to the most recent information available (10.00 a.m.
Compared to last year's elections, the Party of Regions slightly improved its showings while the Yulia Tymoshenko Bloc scored a spectacular success, establishing itself as an equal competitor to the Party of Regions.
Our Ukraine and People's Self-Defence (created in autumn 2006) only succeeded in maintaining their original standings.
The Communists and the Lytvyn Bloc also succeeded at the polls, while the Socialists have been badly defeated.
The groups that did not make it into the Parliament include the Progressive Socialist Party of Ukraine (1.3 percent of votes), the nationalist chauvinists of Svoboda (0.8 percent), and the remaining 12 parties and blocs (with a combined result of 2.2 percent).
This means that the numerous 'technopolitical' projects designed to take away portions of the electorate from the main political parties have failed.
According to Russian, European and internal Ukrainian observers, the vote met democratic standards and - despite some minor faults - there are no grounds to challenge the election results as a whole.
However, observers noted a large number of errors in the lists of voters (according to some organisations, as many as 500,000 people were unable to cast their ballots because they were not included in the lists).
The errors stemmed mainly from the very poor quality of population registers in Ukraine, and from the fact that the software used in compiling the lists had not been sufficiently tested.
As yet, no major political force has lodged any protests against the results of the whole elections.
However, the results in some constituencies have already been questioned, and so in some districts the votes may be eventually deemed invalid.
Possible coalitions Informal consultations concerning future coalitions will start within the next few days.
Formal negotiations will begin only after the new parliament has been formed (coalitions are formed by parliamentary factions, not political parties), which is expected to take place in early November.
Preliminary estimates suggest that the factions of the Tymoshenko Bloc and Our Ukraine/People's Self-Defence together will have a total of around 230 seats (226 seats constitute a simple majority).
It is therefore expected that an 'orange' coalition will be formed, with Yulia Tymoshenko as prime minister.
However, attempts may also be made to form a coalition from the Party of Regions and Our Ukraine (around 246 mandates), which are nevertheless likely to stumble on the choice of the candidate for prime minister (Viktor Yanukovych is unacceptable to President Yushchenko as head of government).
A coalition of the Tymoshenko Bloc and Our Ukraine, even if it also includes the Lytvyn Bloc, may become unstable after a year or so; the main factor of instability would be the expected rivalry in the upcoming 2009 presidential election between Tymoshenko herself and the current president.
No coalition will have a two-thirds majority in the parliament (300 votes) which would be necessary to amend the constitution; in order to do this, the Party of Regions and the Tymoshenko Bloc will have to vote concordantly.
It is therefore uncertain whether work on constitutional amendments will be undertaken, although since the vote Yulia Tymoshenko has already confirmed her willingness to draft and adopt a new constitution.
The most probable scenario is that Putin will take office as prime minister for a short time while a politician anointed by the current president (most likely PM Viktor Zubkov) succeeds him in the Kremlin.
Subsequently, the newly-elected president will resign before the end of his term and Putin will win a new, early presidential election.
It is also possible that before Putin's return to the Kremlin, the presidential term will be extended.
Putin's plan The declarations the president made during the pre-election congress of United Russia on 1 October may be regarded as disclosing another stage of the political plan, the principal objective of which is to allow Putin and his circle to stay in power.
It is the implementation of a kind of 'succession operation', the first stage of which involved the nomination of Viktor Zubkov, the former head of the Financial Monitoring Service and a member of Putin's inner circle, as prime minister on 12 September.
Putin declared at the congress that he intended to take the number one position in United Russia's voting list.
Fulfilling the two conditions mentioned by Putin is a mere formality: United Russia leads in the polls, and it seems certain that the Kremlin's candidate will win the presidential election.
This was the first time that Vladimir Putin revealed his plans concerning the post-2008 period, i.e. after the end of his second presidential term.
His declaration appears surprising, as moving from the post of president to that of prime minister is a downward step in the Russian system of power, in which the prime minister is directly subordinated to the president.
However, Putin's plan to become the head of government should in fact be regarded as a stratagem intended to enable the president to keep real power while abiding by the constitution, under which it is not possible for a person to serve more than two consecutive terms as president.
The 'temporary prime minister' scenario The most probable scenario among the few which are possible is that Putin intends to return to the Kremlin after holding the PM's office for a short spell.
This scenario involves several stages: Firstly, a massive victory for United Russia in the parliamentary election.
By becoming a candidate in the parliamentary election Putin will boost United Russia's popularity (the party already leads the polls with showings of around 55%).
If United Russia indeed gets such a strong showing, it may happen that no other political force except the Communists will make it into the Duma.
In the future Parliament, United Russia may control a qualified majority of votes (over 75 percent of mandates) which it may use to amend the constitution (for example, to extend the term of the head of state, which Vladimir Putin himself suggested in June 2007).
An unquestionable success by a Putin-led United Russia will be generally perceived as a confirmation of his position as the indisputable political and public leader.
This will enable Vladimir Putin to maintain his influence and popularity for some time, even after leaving office as president.
Secondly, the materialisation of the 'weak president' scenario, according to which the presidential election will be won by a politician supported by the Kremlin, and who is both unambitious and loyal to Putin.
The current PM Viktor Zubkov seems to be the most likely candidate for this, as he belongs to Putin's inner circle, has been pretty much unknown so far, and does not seem to have any major personal ambitions.
Thirdly, the new president's resignation (in the case of Zubkov this could be justified, for example, by his age (66) or the state of his health), followed by Putin's victory in an early presidential election.
If this plan were to materialise, Putin might return to the Kremlin for another two terms (each lasting possibly not four but rather, for instance, seven years).
The 'prime minister for a full term' scenario A less probable scenario is one in which Putin will stay in office as prime minister for the full term of the next president (four years under the current constitution).
In the conditions of the current system of governance in Russia, it might prove difficult for Putin to remain an eminence grise who would retain control over a 'weak president' in the longer term.
Under the constitution, the prime minister is directly subordinate to the president; therefore if Putin were to hold the PM's position for that long, a kind of duality in the system of power might arise, and in the longer run, a change in the balance of power might occur in favour of the president.
Consequently, Putin might lose influence.
On the other hand, a constitutional reform, 'tailor-made' to fit Putin's plans and intended to change the political system in Russia from a presidential model to a model resembling the parliamentary-cabinet system, would in practice be a long and tedious procedure.
In addition to constitutional amendments, it would also require thorough changes to the functioning of the extensive state administration apparatus, and might create paralysis in the decision-making apparatus and administrative chaos.
Moreover, the PM's power would be restricted to some extent by the parliament, which would have been reinforced by such a reform, as well as by the political parties represented in it (in practice, the dominant United Russia).
Finally, one should not underestimate the traditions of strong, personalised presidential rule and the subordinated role of the prime minister in the Russian system of government.