Syria: searching for ways to end the violence
The Syrian regime is increasingly isolated on the world stage. Interviewed on 7 January, Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle called for Assad to resign and make way for a democratic fresh start in Syria.
On 11 November, the Syrian opposition agreed to set up a new joint body,
The deadlock in the United Nations Security Council continues.
Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle has repeatedly called upon China and Russia, both veto powers, to stop backing the Syrian regime.
The Security Council has been struggling for months to agree on a united stance in relation to the Syrian regime.
Bild: UN Secretary-General Ban Kimoon and Lakhdar Brahimi
The conflict in Syria was also a dominant theme during the opening week of the United Nations General Assembly from 25 September to 1 October.
Lakhdar Brahimi, the new Joint Special Representative of the Secretary-General and the Arab League, reported on developments to the Security Council.
Brahimi took over from Kofi Annan when the latter chose not to extend his mandate.
The plan has yet to be implemented.
The UN observer mission UNSMIS, which was established to monitor implementation of the Annan plan, also came to an end on 19 August.
Opposition platform gains international recognition
Bild: Meeting of the Syrian opposition in Doha
Syria’s opposition plays an important role in the planning for a peaceful future for the country.
At a meeting held in Doha, the capital of Qatar, from 8 to 11 November, the opposition agreed to form a new joint body, a step which Minister Westerwelle welcomed.
This National Coalition for Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition Forces was recognized by the EU on 10 December and by the Group of Friends of the Syrian People on 12 December as “legitimate representatives of the Syrian people”.
As Foreign Minister Westerwelle noted at the Group of Friends meeting in Marrakech on 12 December, this amounted to a strong message from the vast majority of the international community in favour of peaceful change in Syria and a fresh start based on democracy and pluralism.
The meeting in Marrakech was attended by representatives of 114 countries and 14 international organizations.
The participants included National Coalition President Sheikh Ahmed Moaz alKatib,
whom Westerwelle had already met in Cairo on 13 November, on the margins of a conference of EU and Arab League foreign ministers.
Bild: Minister Westerwelle with United Arab Emirates Minister of State alHashimi and Abdelbaset Sieda (from right)
Large numbers of refugees
Bild: Syrian refugees from Aleppo
Refugee numbers have continued to rise dramatically, according to UN estimates.
The UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs puts the number of conflict victims inside Syria at more than four million.
More than 650,000 people have left Syria for neighbouring countries,
a figure expected to rise considerably as the conflict drags on.
In 2012, the German Government made available around 90 million euros in humanitarian aid.
This money is being spent on projects inside Syria as well as in neighbouring countries.
In a report issued in January 2013, the UN Food and Agriculture Organization stated that around one and half million people in the regions most affected by the conflict would be in urgent need of emergency aid over the coming three to six months.
According to the report, Syria’s agricultural output had been severely reduced, down by as much as 50% in some areas.
The UN’s seven aid agencies sent representatives in January to inspect the situation on the ground.
After visiting the towns of Homs and Talbiseh, they expressed dismay at the conditions they found there.
It has set up an independent Commission of Inquiry on Syria to examine and document human rights violations in the country.
The Commission’s mandate was recently extended until March 2013.
According to a study commissioned by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees Navi Pillay, at least 60,000 people were killed in Syria between March 2011 and the end of November 2012.
On 4 December, in response to fresh reports of that nature, Foreign Minister Westerwelle warned the Syrian regime that such action would be “totally unacceptable”.
More information on the situation in Syria
Human rights defenders are, in my view, everyday heroes.
They make an immeasurable contribution to improving human rights around the world, often at great personal risk.
Supporting and protecting such people is one of the goals of our human rights policy.
The conference also aims to further improve our practical human rights work in the area.
I am thus very pleased to have the opportunity to talk to human rights activists from thirteen different countries."
This is already the fourth conference organized by the Federal Foreign Office for human rights defenders.
Following events for South America, the Middle East, North Africa and West Africa, the focus this time is on Central America and the Caribbean region.
Markus Löning, the Federal Government Human Rights Commissioner, has issued the following statement:
Human rights in Central America and the Caribbean – Federal Foreign Office to organize conference for human rights activists
The Federal Foreign Office, together with its embassies in Central America and the Caribbean, is organizing a regional conference in Panama for human rights activists on 17 and 18 April.
"I am delighted to be able to meet human rights defenders from Central America and the Caribbean at this event.
This is why we have, in the last two years, organized conferences at various locations around the world in conjunction with our embassies and human rights defenders.
Our embassy staff and I myself hope to learn more about the human rights situation in the region by talking to local human rights defenders.
Central America and the Caribbean is an important partner region for Germany, which, however, rarely finds itself in the international spotlight.
We therefore feel it is all the more important to enter into an intensive dialogue with representatives from the region.
Human rights defenders from thirteen countries including Mexico, Panama, Haiti, Cuba and Guyana, will be brought together with embassy staff.
The conference will focus on human rights issues of significance in the region, such as women's rights, the rule of law, impunity, organized crime, freedom of opinion and press freedom, as well as the rights of indigenous peoples and sexual minorities.
Prohibition of anti-personnel mines
The Ottawa Convention is the central treaty on the global prohibition of anti-personnel mines.
Minefield
Its most important provisions are:
a comprehensive prohibition of the production, use, transfer and stockpiling of all types of anti-personnel mines;
an undertaking to destroy existing stocks within four years;
an undertaking to cooperate as far as possible on mine clearance (including technical support), provide information on the dangers posed by mines, and victim assistance;
a credible verification regime.
Implementation
In recent years only three countries have actually deployed anti-personnel mines.
The annually issued Landmine Monitor Report documents the progress made as well as the challenges that remain from a civil society perspective.
Review Conferences and Meetings of States Parties
The Meetings of States Parties are held alternately in a country affected by landmines and in Geneva (1999 Maputo, 2000 Geneva, 2001 Managua, 2002 Geneva, 2003 Bangkok, 2004 Geneva, 2005 Zagreb, 2006 Geneva, 2007 Amman, 2008 Geneva, 2009 Cartagena, 2010 Geneva, 2011 Phnom Penh, 2012 Geneva).
The goal of Germany and its EU partners is to ensure that the Ottawa Convention is applied globally and implemented rigorously.
In the international context the EU (the Commission and the member states combined) is by far the largest donor towards humanitarian mine clearance; between 2006 and 2010 it provided roughly a billion euros.
This figure represents almost half of the total worldwide contribution to humanitarian mine-related projects that year.
The Ottawa Convention (Convention of 18 September 1997 on the prohibition of the use, stockpiling, production and transfer of anti-personnel mines and on their destruction) is the central treaty on the global prohibition of anti-personnel mines.
It has been a milestone in international humanitarian law ever since it entered into force on 1 March 1999.
The Ottawa Convention was signed in that city by 121 countries, including Germany, on 3 and 4 December 1997. To date, a total of 161 countries have ratified or acceded to the Convention.
an undertaking to clear emplaced anti-personnel mines within ten years; this deadline can be extended by a decision taken by the Meeting of the States Parties;
Since the Ottawa Convention entered into force, stockpiles of more than 45 million anti-personnel mines have been destroyed; 88 States Parties, including Germany, have reported that they have completely eliminated their stocks, while 66 States Parties reported never having had any stocks.
During the second Review Conference, held from 30 November to 3 December 2009 in Cartagena (Colombia), progress was assessed and remaining challenges were identified.
An Action Plan (the “Cartagena Plan”) was adopted to tackle the remaining challenges and guarantee that deadlines for the destruction of stockpiles and mine clearance were complied with.
The EU – the world's largest donor towards humanitarian mine clearance
In 2012, the Federal Foreign Office provided 18 million euros for projects in 28 countries and for multilateral programmes.
In 2010 over 180 million euros in funding was provided for projects.
Germany, the largest EU contributor, also accounts for some 20 per cent of contributions to humanitarian mine and ordnance clearance under the auspices of ECHO, the European Commission’s Humanitarian Aid Office.
Diplomacy up close
How to let people abroad get to know Germany?
An Open Day can do the trick, as our man in Warsaw reports.
The Open Day was a cheerful neighbourhood party.
Relations between Germany and Poland are close.
Not only do their Governments work together closely, Polish and German people have also been coming to know one another better over recent decades through such arrangements as youth exchange programmes and town twinnings.
One might wonder what is left for German public relations to do in Poland.
Plenty, says our colleague Konrad Lax. Press Officer at the German Embassy in Warsaw for the last three years,
he looks back at the Open Day held there.
In his comment pieces for an influential national-conservative newspaper, he has been known, for example, to compare Germany's policy on Europe to Kaiser Wilhelm's colonialist pretensions and describe the German political foundations operating in Poland as Government agents.
On this particular Saturday, though, he is primarily thrilled with Germany.
and he is hooked too.
Public relations aimed at everyone
Germany's Ambassador Rüdiger von Fritsch photographed with Open Day visitors
That can even be taken quite literally; a lot of our Open Day visitors live in the immediate neighbourhood.
Easily more than 5000 visitors flood the Embassy premises on Open Day.
Today, there are children in the visa section filling in pretend passports, and hundreds of balloons are sent on their way with postcards attached.
Long queues form at the stands supplying sausages, baking and drinks.
The Embassy has set up a classroom, with a timetable that includes things like the ABC of diplomatic protocol and milestones of German-Polish relations.
Children enjoy themselves playing penalty shoot-outs and building a jigsaw of Europe.
The Embassy and more than 30 of its German and German-Polish partner organizations, as well as German companies, provide information about what they do.
A neighbourhood party that invites you on a voyage of discovery
Visitors enjoying the Open Day
All of this adds up to make the Open Day a cheerful neighbourhood party which centres around the colourful variety of German-Polish relations.
"But here at the Open Day," he says, "there is plenty for me to learn about Germany that even I didn't know."
The stragglers take their left-over bratwursts and the last few balloons away into the Warsaw evening, while the Embassy team gather up empty drinks crates.
Mr P.'s little daughter skips out into the fresh air with a bag crammed with quiz prizes
and brochures, a contented father in her wake.
Of course, Mr P. will continue writing critically about Germany. That's his job, after all.
Nonetheless, his picture of Germany will definitely have gained a number of totally new layers at this Open Day.
Mr P. is a real Germany-buff – and often quite a critic of Germany too.
Today is the German Embassy in Warsaw's Open Day, and the journalist is letting his little daughter drag him from one attraction to the next. She is beaming from ear to ear –
The German Embassy wants to use its public relations work to show what exchange and close collaboration between Germany and Poland mean in real terms – in politics, business and culture.
Above all, we try to reach Poland's broader society – not just the upper echelons – and get them interested in Germany.
Our events, our website and our Facebook page are all aimed at schoolchildren, taxi drivers, nurses – in short, at the Polish folks next door.
On any normal working day, the Embassy is run by 60 seconded staff from Germany and the same number again of locally employed Poles.
Mr P., for instance, knows the art collections held in Germany's major cities and can recite the various branches of the Hohenzollern dynasty in his sleep –
G8 Foreign Ministers meet in London
The G8 Foreign Ministers in London
Meeting George Sabra, Chairman of the Syrian National Council
Prior to the meeting, Foreign Minister Westerwelle talked to representatives of the Syrian opposition, including George Sabra, Chairman of the Syrian National Council, and Ghassan Hitto, interim Prime Minister.
He assured them that Germany supported the project of creating “a strong and united opposition on the basis of democratic principles” and emphasized the need to overcome the “terrible logic of civil war” and force the old regime to enter negotiations.
The Group of Eight, or G8, comprises Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Russia, the UK and the United States. The EU is also represented.
The members take it in turns to chair the group, rotating annually.
These include combating sexual violence in conflicts, cyber security, the situation in Somalia and foreign investment in Myanmar.
Click here for more information on the G8
The situation in Syria, tensions on the Korean Peninsula and the ongoing conflict surrounding Iran’s nuclear programme were some of the items on the agenda.
The situation in Syria, tensions on the Korean Peninsula and the ongoing conflict surrounding Iran’s nuclear programme were some of the most important items on the agenda when the G8 Foreign Ministers met in London on 10 and 11 April.
Click here to visit the website of the UK’s G8 Presidency
G8 Foreign Ministers meet in London
The situation in Syria, tensions on the Korean Peninsula and the ongoing conflict surrounding Iran’s nuclear programme were some of the most important items on the agenda when the G8 Foreign Ministers met in London on 10 and 11 April.
He assured them that Germany supported the project of creating “a strong and united opposition on the basis of democratic principles”
and emphasized the need to overcome the “terrible logic of civil war” and force the old regime to enter negotiations.
As the Foreign Minister outlined, the German Government is also assisting moderate opposition forces in providing people with basic services and supplies in the areas under their control.
“The Syrian people need tangible evidence,” he said, “that there is a democratic alternative to the violence of the Assad regime.”
In their meeting statement, the G8 Foreign Ministers express deep concerns at the “human tragedy” of the conflict in Syria and reaffirm their support for a Syrian-led political transition.
Concern at tensions on the Korean Peninsula
Ashton, Kerry and Westerwelle (right to left)
The option of imposing further sanctions on North Korea, he said, was “not off the table”.
Westerwelle went on to commend China and G8 partner Russia for their cooperation on the issue of North Korea.
A broad agenda
These included the prevention of sexual violence in conflict, a matter to which the host, Foreign Secretary William Hague, gives particular priority.
US actress and UN Special Envoy Angelina Jolie had travelled to London as well to promote the issue.
Germany also supports the initiative and helped advance the issue during its 2011-2012 membership of the UN Security Council.
The discussions in London also covered the situation in the Middle East, security on the Internet and international support for the stabilization of Somalia,
as well as guidelines for responsible foreign investment in Myanmar.
Myanmar has only recently started demonstrating greater political and economic openness.
The intention is for new development programmes and investment to be guided by international standards with regard to, for example, human rights and environmental concerns.
Lastly, the Ministers in London spoke about progress on the Deauville Partnership.
Instituted at the 2011 G8 Summit in Deauville, France, the Partnership is intended to support reform processes in Arab countries in transition.
It is a means for the G8 to encourage trade and investment, with particular emphasis on small and medium-sized businesses.
The UK has held the G8 Presidency since January 2013.
Click here for more information on the G8 provided by diplo.de
The situation in Syria, tensions on the Korean Peninsula and the ongoing conflict surrounding Iran’s nuclear programme were some of the items on the agenda.
Ghassan Hitto (left) and Guido Westerwelle in London
In view of the latest threats emanating from North Korea, the Foreign Ministers’ statement condemns Pyongyang’s nuclear weapons and ballistic missile programmes, as well as its aggressive rhetoric, “in the strongest possible terms”.
Germany’s Foreign Minister emphasized that the statement “could not be more unequivocal”.
He also used the context of North Korea’s and Iran’s nuclear programmes to reiterate the importance of international non-proliferation efforts.
Alongside the current crises and conflicts surrounding Syria, North Korea and Iran, the UK Presidency had added issues of its own to the agenda.
G8 Foreign Ministers’ meeting statement, London, 11 April 2013
Foreign Minister Westerwelle sorry to see Prime Minister Fayyad resign
Foreign Minister Westerwelle issued the following statement in response to the resignation of Salam Fayyad, Prime Minister of the Palestinian Authority:
I am very sorry that Prime Minister Fayyad has resigned.
Our working relationship over recent years was shaped by good cooperation and a spirit of trust.
We will continue to strive alongside our partners to get the Middle East peace process back on track through direct negotiations about a fair two-state solution.
As Prime Minister, Salam Fayyad played a major part in the considerable progress that has been made towards laying the foundations of Palestinian statehood.
According to Federal Foreign Office sources, Foreign Minister Westerwelle spoke to Prime Minister Fayyad on the phone during the last few days to express his recognition and appreciation with regard to the Prime Minister’s work.
The Middle East conflict
Westerwelle and al-Khatib on 1 February 2013
The assistance was prompted by a request addressed to the German Government by the National Coalition of Syrian opposition forces.
National Coalition President Moaz al-Khatib personally asked Guido Westerwelle for help ensuring severely injured Syrians received treatment.
In conjunction with the National Coalition and with the support of Jordanian partners, the Federal Foreign Office and Defence Ministry have identified 36 people who have sustained very serious injuries and have to date been receiving preliminary treatment in medical institutions in Jordan.
They have been selected according to medical criteria.
Westerwelle commented as follows:
We are appalled at the thousands of lives the terrible civil war in Syria has already claimed and at the even greater number of people injured.
The mission we have now started is intended to allow some of those most seriously injured in this war to recover as quickly and completely as possible here in Germany.
This help from the German Government is also intended as political support to the National Coalition of Syrian opposition forces, which is becoming more and more of a visible, credible alternative to the Assad regime in the eyes of the Syrian people.
Volunteers from the Syrian community
The cost of this operation will be shared between the Foreign Office and Defence Ministry.
On 15 April, the patients will be flown from Jordan to Germany in a Bundeswehr Airbus specially equipped for transporting injured individuals, to receive treatment at Bundeswehr hospitals in Berlin, Hamburg, Ulm and Westerstede.
Syria: Strengthening moderate forces
Help for critically injured Syrians
In providing treatment for 36 critically injured Syrians, Germany is also providing political support to the Syrian opposition.
Thirty-six people seriously injured in the conflict in Syria will be receiving medical treatment in Germany as of 15 April.
As Foreign Minister Westerwelle has pointed out, the German Government is thereby also providing political support to the Syrian opposition forces in the National Coalition.
The Federal Foreign Office and Defence Ministry are working in close collaboration with the Syrian community in Germany. Volunteers will provide the patients from Syria with social support at the four places where they will be treated.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle speaking to Germany’s EU Ambassadors
Germany’s Ambassadors to EU member states are convening in Berlin.
A community of shared values:
Germany in the EU
Germany’s Ambassadors to EU countries are meeting in Berlin today for a Conference of the Heads of German Missions convened by Foreign Minister Westerwelle, where they will engage in consultations with the Minister and other high-level representatives from Berlin and Brussels.
The talks will concentrate on topical issues surrounding the future of the European Union, resolution of the debt crisis and Germany’s role within the EU.
This regular forum gives the Ambassadors an opportunity both to share impressions of their respective host countries face-to-face and to gain direct insights into the current state of play in Berlin and Brussels.
This is a country which is also still struggling with major social injustice twenty years after the end of apartheid.
Many of the black majority disadvantaged by that system are still living in poverty today.
Visiting Cape Town on 28 April, Westerwelle said that a country could only develop successfully if “everyone feels the benefit” of good economic growth rates.
What was needed was for people to have a real stake in their country’s economic and social life, he said, averring that
An everyday scene in the township of Philippi
South Africa is Africa’s largest economy but suffers from high unemployment; official figures have it at 25%.
The gap between rich and poor is very wide.
Minister Westerwelle intends to use this Africa trip to turn the spotlight onto the continent’s potential for development, as the European view often only associates Africa with poverty, crisis and conflict.
At the African Institute for Mathematical Sciences (AIMS), junior academics from all over Africa told the Minister about their plans for the future and their visions for the continent.
with 15 AIMS centres being set up across Africa as part of the Next Einstein Initiative launched in 2009.
From Cape Town, Westerwelle will fly on to Pretoria for talks with Foreign Minister Maite Nkoana-Mashabane, among others.
Philippi is one of Cape Town’s poorest and most lawless townships. The Community Centre aims to improve living conditions there through a range of different projects and initiatives.
As well as meeting his counterpart Oldemiro Júlio Marques Balói, he will be visiting the industrial port of Maputo and the DREAM project for pregnant HIV-positive women, which receives funding from the German Aids Foundation.
With his fifth visit to southern Africa,
The Council of Europe and the fight against international terrorism
Established by the Treaty of London on 5 May 1949, the Council of Europe has its headquarters in Strasbourg and with its 47 members advocates respect for human rights, pluralist democracy and the rule of law.
Helping to combat and prevent terrorism
The fight against terrorism can pose a threat to those values if it fails to uphold the precepts of the rule of law.
Alongside the prevention of acts of terror, its work has focused on the compatibility of anti-terrorism measures with the protection of human rights.
The Council of Europe is at pains to maintain a balance between defending codified rights and imposing restrictions necessary to the fight against terrorism.
The conventions are open to non-members of the Council of Europe.
One of its main tasks has been to draft the Protocol amending the 1977 European Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism, which was ratified on 13 July 2011.
More Council of Europe international legislation
Convention on Cybercrime of 23 November 2001
Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism of 16 May 2009
Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings of 16 May 2005
Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence of 11 May 2011
Council of Europe website on combating terrorism
The Council of Europe’s involvement in combating terrorism goes back to the 1970s.
Several of the Council of Europe’s 200-odd conventions are concerned with terrorism.
The Council of Europe’s Committee of Experts on Terrorism
In response to the events of 11 September 2001, the Council of Europe’s Committee of Ministers decided on 8 November of the same year to establish a Multidisciplinary Group on International Action against Terrorism, which has since been replaced by CODEXTER, the Committee of Experts on Terrorism.
Happy anniversary to the African Union
Africa and its AU can be proud of what they have achieved.
The African Union is the voice of a continent on the rise.
It is our key partner in all matters pertaining to Africa as a whole.
It is essential that further moves be undertaken toward even greater integration, as it is only by steadily increasing its unity that Africa will be able to fulfil its full potential.
African Union
Federal Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle issued the following statement today (25 May) to mark the 50th anniversary of the founding of the Organization of African Unity:
Germany sends its best wishes to the African Union on the occasion of its 50th anniversary.
More than any other organization, the African Union stands up for the need to have the responsibility for dealing with Africa’s problems lie in African hands.
Germany remains a reliable partner to the African Union and will continue to support it in its endeavour to take the continent’s challenges into its own hands.
Exchange of pavilions at the Biennale
Wednesday, 29 May will see the opening of the Venice Biennale, one of the most important exhibitions of contemporary art.
The German pavilion at the Biennale
International artists in the German pavilion
A view of the French pavilion
“At the same time,” Pieper continued, “the choice of international artists shows that today we understand art in a much wider context which goes far beyond national boundaries and continents.”
The German pavilion will this year house work by four international artists with various national backgrounds, namely Ai Weiwei, Romuald Karmakar, Santu Mofokeng and Dayanita Singh.
The curator is Susanne Gaensheimer of Germany, who previously fulfilled that role in 2011.
The Venice Art Biennale is open to the public from 1 June to 24 November 2013.
The Biennale di Venezia takes place every two years and is one of the most important international forums for contemporary visual arts.
Germany traditionally makes a contribution to the exhibition which is realized and part-funded by the Federal Foreign Office in collaboration with the Institute for Foreign Cultural Relations.
In 2011, the German pavilion won the Golden Lion – the main prize awarded at the Biennale – for artwork by the late Christoph Schlingensief.
Germany and France are exchanging national pavilions to mark the 50th anniversary of the Élysée Treaty.
In the grounds of the Giardini, Germany’s contribution will be exhibited in the French pavilion, while the French contribution will be on display in the German pavilion.
Minister of State Cornelia Pieper, who will take part in the opening of the exhibition, said that this art project was “a clear embodiment of the lively exchange, the close ties and the affinity between our countries and peoples”.
Russian NGOs “in a dramatic situation”
The panel discussion on “Russian (Civil) Society – One Year On”
Arseny Roginsky reported that Russian NGOs were in a dramatic situation.
Many NGOs, he said, would cease to exist in their present form, “but will not stop doing what they do”. He saw the fact that not one NGO had voluntarily registered for “foreign agent” status as a pivotal sign.
Lilia Shibanova told those taking part in the discussion that “your interest gives us hope!”
She expressed her delight at seeing so many young people in attendance.
In Russia too, she said, the future lay in the hands of the younger generation who were active in society and favoured a European outlook.
Opening statement by Dr Schockenhoff available for download (PDF, 85 KB)
On 13 May, one year after Russia’s President Putin took office and two weeks after the major NGO conference held at the Federal Foreign Office, the Coordinator of German-Russian Intersocietal Cooperation arranged a panel discussion with Lilia Shibanova, founder and managing director of the election-observer association GOLOS, Arseny Roginsky, chairman of human rights organization Memorial International, and Rostislav Valvoda and Stefan Melle, both representing the EU-Russia Civil Society Forum.
A predominantly young audience of around 100 joined the panellists in discussing the current situation of non-governmental organizations in Russia and the possibilities for European cooperation at the civil-society level.
It demonstrated, he said, the NGO sector’s growing confidence.
Helping to rebuild Libya
With the end of the Gaddafi regime, Libya is set to make a fresh start.
Germany has been active in Libya since 2011 working to support state-building
and has also provided rapid humanitarian aid.
Destruction in Tripoli
The fighting has left Libyan society deeply scarred.
Germany has provided rapid humanitarian aid and is working with the international community to support Libya’s state-building efforts.
The elections to a General National Congress in July 2012 and the forming of a Government in late October 2012 are important milestones on Libya’s road to democracy.
The political process will culminate in elections held on the basis of the new constitution.
Major challenges
The stabilization and democratization process now under way remains in great peril, however.
Reconciliation among former adversaries is going to be a difficult and painful process.
The business sector, too, is still not back to normal despite the lifting of most sanctions.
Since the state structures needed to tackle these problems effectively do not exist, establishing them must now be Libya’s first priority.
Germany and the international community are providing assistance here.
Humanitarian aid and the destruction of weapons
German aid included emergency medical supplies, steps to evacuate and look after refugees, as well as food and medical supplies for the civilian population in Libya.
Germany is also helping to destroy munitions and mines and inform the population of the dangers. In addition, it supports projects for the control of small weapons.
Together with the United States, the Federal Foreign Office is also financing the establishment of the Libyan Mine Action Centre (LMAC) as the national authority for mine clearance, explosive ordnance disposal and the control of small weapons.
Germany is also working on securing chemical agents. The German Government announced at the international support conference for Libya in February 2013 that it was earmarking up to four million euros to finance a detonation furnace to destroy chemical weapons.
Furthermore, the chemical weapons destruction plant in Ruwagha which Germany helped rebuild is to start destroying artillery shells filled with mustard gas in 2013.
To ensure better security of nuclear material used in research and medicine, as well as to prevent nuclear smuggling, a number of projects are currently being devised with Libyan officials in consultation with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
State-building
In the area of state-building, too, Germany is providing Libya with practical assistance.
Under the aegis of the United Nations, the international community has offered the country support and systematic guidance for its reconstruction efforts.
Germany has seconded experts to these missions.
Germany is also supporting state-building with targeted projects.
To support the elections to the General National Congress in July 2012, the German Government helped finance an election observation mission and the resulting analysis.
Germany is promoting projects to provide advice on drawing up a constitution, combating corruption and helping build civil society in Libya.
The focus is on capacity-building and networking, promoting equal participation of women in all social processes and in political bodies, as well as on anchoring women’s rights in the new constitution and in laws.
Read more about Germany’s support for the participation of women in the new Libya.
Germany is also promoting independent professional reporting in Libya.
Help is being provided for journalists and media centres as they perform their tasks linked to promoting democracy and preventing conflict.
Some German political foundations are also working in Libya.
In the second half of 2013, a convention to draft a new constitution is to be elected by universal suffrage.
Tripoli (September 2011)
Mine clearance in Libya
When fighting broke out in Libya in February 2011, Germany immediately sent in humanitarian aid worth eight million euros in an effort to relieve the suffering of those affected by the conflict.
Final statement from the international support conference for Libya, Paris, 12 February 2013 (French) (PDF, 33 KB)
Foreign Minister Westerwelle calls National Dialogue in Iraq indispensable
Currently on a visit to Canada, Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle today discussed the situation in Iraq and the danger of the Syrian conflict spilling across the region in a telephone call with Iraqi Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zedari.
He issued the following statement after the conversation:
The major, brutal attacks that have shaken Iraq in recent days and weeks demonstrate the remorselessly callous way in which the opponents of democracy operate.
The forces which seek to use violence to halt the progress being made in democratization must not prevail.
He underlined the key importance of the international Syria Conference currently being planned, saying it would provide an opportunity to get the political process under way.
It remains indispensable to Iraq’s development that all sections of society be engaged in an honest and credible National Dialogue.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle highlighted the particular responsibility that Iraq has, as Syria’s immediate neighbour, to help prevent the conflict in Syria from spilling out into the region.
The UN Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons (CCW)
Protocol V
Anti-vehicle mines (Mines Other Than Anti-Personnel Mines – MOTAPM)
It builds on basic principles of international law, according to which the right of the parties to a conflict to choose methods or means of warfare is not unlimited and that humanitarian issues must be respected when using certain conventional weapons.
The States parties are obliged to meet annual reporting obligations.
This topic was put on the CCW agenda again in 2012 at Germany’s initiative.
Implementation by Germany
The Protocol entered into force on 12 November 2006, six months after the deposit of the 20th instrument of ratification.
However, the CCW negotiations ended without agreement.
This makes it even more important for the Oslo standards to be strengthened and universally implemented, in order to bring about a comprehensive ban on cluster munitions.
The UN Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons of 10 October 1980 (CCW) entered into force on 2 December 1983. Its purpose, as reflected in its full title, is to prohibit or restrict the use of certain conventional weapons, which may be deemed to be excessively injurious or to have indiscriminate effects in declared wars and other armed conflicts.
In addition to general rules on reducing the dangers emanating from explosive remnants of war, Protocol V includes an obligation to record relevant information and mark and remove conventional unexploded and abandoned ordnance.
It also contains provisions on voluntarily improving the reliability of munitions.
In the same spirit, Germany also makes a financial contribution to the sponsorship programme to enable representatives of poorer developing countries to participate in the Meetings of States parties and Meetings of Experts.
Protocol II on Mines, Booby-Traps and Other Devices, amended on 3 May 1996 (Amended Protocol II),
The annual discussions between military experts and government representatives focus on the problems associated with improvised explosive devices (IED), the indiscriminate effect of IED attacks on soldiers and civilians alike, and on exchanging information with a view to improving countermeasures.
In spite of heated debate, the Annual Conference of the High Contracting Parties in November 2012 failed to extend the mandate for talks at expert level due to opposition from Belarus and Cuba.
The Weimar Triangle was established on 29 August 1991 by a joint declaration issued in Weimar by the Foreign Ministers of Germany, Poland and France. It was intended to bear witness to the successful reconciliation process that had brought Germany closer to its two largest immediate neighbours to the west and east after the horrors of the Second World War.
The three partners have held regular consultations on European and foreign policy matters ever since.
The founding fathers: Krzysztof Skubiszewski, Hans-Dietrich Genscher and Roland Dumas (2003)
The Franco-German friendship was set on a solid footing back in the early 1960s with the Élysée Treaty.
Not until the disappearance of the Iron Curtain which divided Europe right up until 1989, however, was it possible to seal this special relationship with our eastern partner Poland.
Whereas the initial priority was to integrate the new democracies of Central and Eastern Europe, and particularly Poland, into the European Community, the goal changed after the European Union’s enlargement to include several new countries in 2004.
The main idea now is to create a forum of equal partners at the heart of Europe.
As Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle has put it,
“The dialogue between Germany, France and Poland on key European issues plays a valuable role in the emergence of a European identity.”
Two of the three founding fathers celebrated the 20th anniversary of the Weimar Triangle in the city on 29 August 2011.
Regular exchange on European and foreign policy issues
Trilateral meetings are held at various levels to discuss European and foreign policy matters.
A meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the Weimar Triangle took place in Berlin on 29 February 2012 at the invitation of Foreign Minister Westerwelle.
The broad agenda ranged from the European debt crisis to developments taking place in Syria and Belarus.
The Weimar Triangle Ministers for European Affairs also convene regularly to consult one another.
They most recently met in Warsaw on 1 October 2012 at the invitation of Poland’s State Secretary Piotr Serafin.
Minister of State Michael Georg Link has invited them to Heilbronn in mid-July for their next session.
On 7 February 2011 Federal Chancellor Merkel met Poland’s President Komorowski and the then French President Sarkozy in Warsaw.
They decided to develop the activities of the Franco-German and German-Polish Youth Offices to generate trilateral youth work.
With Poland’s help, Germany and France also want to further intensify the EU’s cooperation with its eastern neighbours.
Clear commitment to cooperation in the Coalition Agreement
In its 2009 Coalition Agreement the German Government aims to intensify relations with Poland and the Central and Eastern European countries, and to make greater use of the Weimar Triangle for informal coordination between Germany, France and Poland.
One clear signal for this trend was that Poland and France were the first countries visited by Federal Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle after taking office in October 2009.
The partner countries quickly took up this German initiative – on 1 February 2010 the three Ministers for Europe met in Warsaw at the invitation of Poland.
Minister of State Pieper with Youth Parliament participants
“Weimar Triangle of Culture”
The Weimar Triangle is to be given a new cultural dimension in future.
A major focus will be placed on projects which allow direct contact between people from the three countries, so as to strengthen their confidence in this friendship and cooperation.
Specific emphasis is to be given to civil society engagement in the Weimar Triangle.
Austria
Switzerland
Africa (AFR)
In recognition of Africa's growing political and economic significance, the programme aims to utilise the potential for cooperation in a spirit of partnership.
The Seminar is designed for young diplomats from Sub-Saharan Africa.
the course is targeted towards young diplomats from sub-Saharan countries.
recent history,
Europe and Germany aim to improve and build on their special relationship to Africa.
“politics” and
economy
An Afghan non-governmental organisation is not only teaching children in Mazar-e-Sharif how to skateboard. It is also opening up educational opportunities for them, improving their social skills and fostering tolerance.
40% of the children taking skateboard lessons here are girls
The Federal Foreign Office funded the construction of the facility in Mazar-e-Sharif.
It seeks to get children off the streets, give them some fun, open up new opportunities for them, overcome prejudices, foster equal opportunities and, through skateboarding, get them into educational programmes.
Skateistan teaches Afghan children not just skateboarding, but also social skills and tolerance
The Skateistan project opened the first ever skateboarding school in Kabul in 2009.
The official opening of the skateboarding facility in Mazar-e-Sharif
The project is particularly dedicated to helping girls.
The Federal Foreign Office, which contributed much of the funding needed to build the hall in Kabul, has now also paid for the construction of the facility in Mazar-e-Sharif.
Skateistan itself is an award-winning non-profit organisation, which is always grateful for support.
Skateistan was founded by Oliver Percovich, an Australian of German descent, in 2007.
The first skateboarding lessons were given in a dried-up fountain. Nowadays, Afghan girls and boys are able to practise skateboarding and take part in educational programmes together in two large facilities in Kabul and Mazar-e-Sharif.
The 1800 m2 skateboarding hall complete with ramps, changing rooms, a classroom, internet access and a cafeteria was such a success that it was possible to open a second facility this year in Mazar-e-Sharif.
In addition to skateboarding, the project focuses on art-based educational workshops, in order to create equal opportunities for all, and to let both literate and illiterate students practise multimedia skills and problem-solving.
Particularly attractive to children from poorer families is the 12-month “Back to School” programme, which seeks to get the children back into the public school system.
Skateistan – a different class of school in Afghanistan
The Afghan non-governmental organisation Skateistan started its work in Kabul in 2007,
and soon opened a skateboarding school for children aged 5 to 18. This school not only offers skateboard lessons, but also opens up access to education for its pupils, improves their social skills and fosters understanding, tolerance and equal opportunities.
Now a second skateboarding school has opened in Mazar-e-Sharif.
Skateboarding and education in Kabul and Mazar-e-Sharif
Nearly 40% girls
The Skateistan project website
Video about the new skateboarding hall
Film project: “Four Wheels and a Board in Kabul”
To date, over 2000 nuclear weapon tests have been carried out worldwide.
The German Government is committed to ensuring that the North Korean tests of 2006, 2009 and 12 February 2013 remain the last of their kind and that nuclear tests are banned worldwide.
It is also intended to prevent nuclear-weapon states from developing new additions to their arsenals,
thus supporting the aim of nuclear disarmament laid down in Article 6 of the NPT.
Foreign Ministers’ appeal
Intergovernmental conferences are held every two years (most recently on 23 September 2011 in New York) with the aim of facilitating the Treaty’s entry into force.
The next review is scheduled for the end of September 2013.
Ratification status
It has to date been signed by 183 countries, of which 159 have also ratified it (most recently Brunei and Chad, which ratified it in January 2013).
The CTBT can only enter into force, however, when all 44 of the countries listed in Annex 2 of the Treaty have ratified.
Eight of the “Annex 2 countries” have yet to do so.
A nuclear test
Of the five NPT nuclear-weapon states (China, France, Russia, the UK and the US), China and the United States have signed but not yet ratified the CTBT.
To enter into force, the CTBT still needs to be ratified by Egypt, Iran and Israel as well as by India, Pakistan and North Korea, three countries which have not even signed it.
Both in its own right and together with its EU partners and the Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative (NPDI), the German Government is pressing the nine “hold-out” states in particular to take the steps required for the Treaty to enter into force.
The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization (CTBTO) established to implement the Treaty has its headquarters in Vienna and has the temporary status of a Preparatory Commission pending the Treaty’s entry into force.
Since 2005 its Executive Secretary has been Ambassador Tibor Tóth (Hungary).
The Executive Secretary designate, who will take over on 1 August 2013, is Dr Lassina Zerbo (Burkina Faso).
The CTBTO’s budget for 2012 amounted to some 44.6 million US dollars plus 55.7 million euros. Germany is providing 8.1% (approx. 7.5 million euros) of the total sum, making it the third-largest contributor after the United States and Japan.
Global verification system
Although not yet in force, the Treaty’s political effect has already contributed significantly to the goal of ending nuclear test explosions worldwide.
All Signatory States have declared, and adhered to, a moratorium on nuclear tests.
The CTBTO’s unique verification system – a global network of 337 planned monitoring stations, nearly 85% of which are now operational, as well as 16 laboratories – allows it already at this stage to detect even minor underground nuclear detonations anywhere in the world.
The information collected around the globe is processed and analysed at the International Data Centre at the CTBTO’s headquarters in Vienna.
The International Monitoring System consists of a network of stations covering all test media (the earth’s crust, the atmosphere and the oceans). Stations may use any of four different verification techniques (seismological monitoring; radionuclide and inert gas measurement; infrasound; hydroacoustics) to check for any sign of nuclear detonations.
After the tsunami on 26 December 2004, the stations began to make their data available for civil and research purposes as well.
As in the case of the March 2011 earthquake and tsunami disaster in Japan, the CTBTO now routinely transmits its monitoring data to disaster-early-warning organizations.
Germany’s contribution
Five German stations are part of the International Monitoring System – two seismological and two infrasound stations operated by the Federal Institute for Geosciences and Natural Resources (BGR) as well as the radionuclide station operated by the Institute for Atmospheric Radioactivity (IAR) of the Federal Office for Radiation Protection.
In addition, the BGR has assumed the role of National Data Centre.
In the field of hydroacoustics, the Federal Armed Forces Verification Centre and Institute for Underwater Sound and Geophysical Research have special expertise, which is made available for on-site inspections specifically to help realize the Treaty’s aims.
Joining the Friends of the CTBT
The Friends of the CTBT are a group of states party to the CTBT: Australia, Canada, Finland, Japan, the Netherlands and now Germany.
They primarily meet for consultations in Geneva and prepare the informal meetings of CTBT Foreign Ministers which are held every two years.
The last such meeting took place in New York on 27 September 2012, on the fringes of the United Nations General Assembly.
The joint statement which the Foreign Ministers issued on that occasion, calling for the CTBT to be brought into force, had the express support of Foreign Minister Westerwelle.
Federal Institute for Geosciences and Natural Resources
Federal Office for Radiation Protection
Combating terrorism with the GCTF
The Global Counterterrorism Forum (GCTF) is an informal, multilateral forum established at the initiative of the United States in September 2011. Its objective is to combat terrorism, particularly by developing and strengthening civilian capacities and institutions which underpin the rule of law.
The GCTF’s work consists primarily of developing and sharing good practice as well as assisting and coordinating steps to enhance civilian capacities as part of international anti-terrorism efforts.
Its membership numbers 29 countries, including several from the Muslim world, and the EU.
The joint chairmanship is currently held by the United States and Turkey.
The most recent meeting of the Coordinating Committee, alongside a meeting of the Foreign Ministers, was held in Abu Dhabi in December 2012.
The new facility, which is almost three times the size of the skateboarding school in Kabul, will be able to accommodate up to  1000 kids and youngsters attending regular lessons.
European Commission
Skateistan’s goals are ambitious.
Skateistan’s programmes are aimed at Afghan girls and boys from all sections of society.
Nearly 40% of Skateistan’s students are female.
The Council of the Baltic Sea States
The Baltic Sea
The Council of the Baltic Sea States (CBSS) has a membership encompassing the states actually on the Baltic Sea – Denmark, Sweden, Finland, Poland, Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, Russia and Germany – as well as Norway, Iceland and the European Commission.
The founding Declaration of the CBSS created a regional forum with the intention – once the Iron Curtain was gone – of developing new forms of cooperation in the Baltic Sea region.
Following the fall of the Wall and the accession of Poland and the Baltic countries to the European Union, there have been fundamental changes in the CBSS environment.
The CBSS meets every other year at foreign minister level.
At their ministerial sessions, the foreign ministers determine the priorities for the following two years.
On 30 June 2012, Germany’s one-year Presidency of the CBSS came to an end.
Oslo: In 2011, the year-long CBSS Presidency passed from Norway to Germany.
Originally, the Council’s task was to overcome East-West confrontation by supporting the eastern Baltic Sea states on their path towards political stability, democratic institutions and a market economy.
That task was largely concluded with the accession of Poland and the Baltic countries to the European Union.
At their summit in Riga in 2008, the CBSS heads of government therefore adopted a comprehensive reform to align the Council with the new situation.
Today the countries around the Baltic Sea enjoy very close political, economic and cultural relations; the region is a showcase for regional cooperation.
Five long-term priorities, each with strategy areas as listed, determine the activities of the CBSS for the 2010-2015 period:
Climate change
Sustainable urban and rural development
Sustainable consumption and production
Innovation and education for sustainable development
Creating a renewable energy market
Sustainable growth
Maritime policy
Cultural heritage
Contemporary culture
Promotion of regional identity
The collective Baltic Sea identity is reflected in a wide range of international networks, organisations and institutions.
These cover all spheres – from cooperation between cities and regions to coast guards and the Baltic Sea Parliamentary Conference.
This involves the CBSS as a suitable forum for increasing collaboration with non-EU members, and Russia in particular, in the Baltic Sea region.
The Baltic Sea is an inland sea within Europe, but not all the Baltic Sea states are EU members.
The Council has now become a widely copied role model for other regions, such as those around the Black Sea and the Danube.
In its Communication of 23 March 2012 on EU Strategy for the Baltic Sea region, the European Commission wrote in favour of increased cooperation with neighbours, primarily Russia.
For the success and coalescence of the Baltic Sea region, it is essential that the CBSS and the EU cooperate intensively and fruitfully.
Strandvägen, Stockholm
The CBSS Secretariat is based in Stockholm and has a staff of 17.
Its job is to coordinate CBSS cooperation.
The position of Director General has been held by Jan Lundin of Sweden since 1 September 2010.
Summits are held every two years to convene the heads of state and government of the Baltic Sea states. The first took place in 1996, and the most recent was held in Stralsund in May 2012.
The summits take stock of regional cooperation and put forward priorities for future Council work.
These summits alternate with the meetings of foreign ministers.
Meeting of the CBSS in Plön on 5 February 2012
The Committee of Senior Officials (CSO) is the operative steering committee of the CBSS.
It consists of senior civil servants from the eleven CBSS Member States and the European Union.
Between the foreign ministers sessions, the CSO coordinates and steers CBSS activities.
The chair of the CSO is appointed by whichever country currently holds the CBSS Presidency.
The Presidency rotates annually.
Further rounds of meetings bring together other groups of relevant ministers as well as experts on the long-term priorities.
The most well-known Expert Group is Baltic 21, established in 1996 and charged with reconciling sustainable development with sustainable tourism policy.
It convenes twice a year.
Others include, for example, the Expert Group on Maritime Policy, BASREC, the Expert Group on Nuclear and Radiation Safety and SEBA.
The CBSS is a broad network of international cooperation in many spheres affecting the Baltic.
Ten countries currently have observer status, namely
Belarus, France, Italy, the Netherlands, Romania, Slovakia, Spain, Ukraine, the UK and the US.
There are also 16 strategic partners, including the OECD.
Summits of heads of state and government
The foreign ministers
The Committee of Senior Officials and Working Groups
The Expert Groups
Since Poland and the Baltic countries joined the European Union, there have been fundamental changes in the CBSS environment.
Long-term priorities
Education and culture
Civil security and the human dimension
The CBSS as a forum for cooperation
Our shared values are the foundation on which this Europe stands.
They are the legacy of the Enlightenment and of the revolutions for liberty in 1789 and 1989.
The ideals that drove those revolutions are still the norms at the heart of our societies today.
What we have built on those foundations here in Europe has massive international appeal.
We need to protect and propagate that precious achievement.
This Tuesday, Foreign Minister Westerwelle was joined by Volkswagen CEO Martin Winterkorn in welcoming around 1500 entrepreneurs to the Business Forum of the 2013 Ambassadors Conference.
The record numbers attending reflect the importance of dialogue between the diplomatic and economic spheres in an age of globalisation.
Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle, Volkswagen CEO Martin Winterkorn and Minister of State Cornelia Pieper
The method worked particularly well this year,
Foreign Minister Westerwelle giving his opening speech at the Ambassadors Conference Business Forum
In his opening speech, Foreign Minister Westerwelle emphasised the extent to which Germany, as a major exporter, depends on its openness and its complex of international ties.
He described external economic affairs and diplomacy as two sides of the same coin.
In his view as German Foreign Minister, concluding a transatlantic free trade agreement with the United States would be particularly crucial:
As an engine of growth, this Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership could make a key contribution towards overcoming the crisis.
I believe the time is ripe for a transatlantic single market.
A transatlantic agreement that covered investment, services, norms and standards as well as trade issues would be a convincing means of ensuring that Europe and America can hold their own in this age of globalisation.
saying it would send a global message against protectionism and in support of free trade.
Martin Winterkorn, CEO of Volkswagen AG, speaking at the Ambassadors Conference Business Forum
The Volkswagen CEO furthermore used his speech to advocate the greater internationalisation of the European economy.
He went on to point out that this would require Europe to provide the European economy with even greater support,
particularly by intensively fostering dialogue between the spheres of foreign policy and business.
He agreed with Foreign Minister Westerwelle that foreign policy which foregrounded business had become the key to success for economies in a globalised world.
After the opening event, the business people, diplomats and politicians in attendance took part in a number of discussion forums and workshops.
The focus here was on dialogue between the business sphere and the foreign service.
The discussions on current political and economic trends and on developing business opportunities in various regions of the world attracted particular interest.
The Federal Foreign Office and its more than 220 embassies and consulates-general aid and assist German firms worldwide.
Each mission abroad has at least one contact person for external trade issues.
Many embassies also have staff from other Federal Ministries who can bring their knowledge to bear in fields such as the economy, agriculture, science, development cooperation, finance or social affairs.
International networks and openness
with more than 1500 participants from the business world converging on the Foreign Office on 27 August to discuss the major economic and political trends in overseas markets with Foreign Minister Westerwelle, Volkswagen CEO Martin Winterkorn and the heads of Germany’s missions abroad.
External economic affairs and diplomacy go hand in hand
Germany’s missions abroad, he said, saw themselves as door-openers for German industry and provided German companies with advice and practical support in their overseas activities.
Supporting a transatlantic free trade agreement
Minister Westerwelle’s speech went on to advocate more free trade.
This was the route Europe was pursuing, he said – hailing it as “the ideal way to forge close international ties”.
raising Europe’s profile at a global level
Guest speaker Martin Winterkorn also underscored the significance of a transatlantic free trade agreement,
Europe’s companies, he said, would only be successful in the long term if they could hold their own in the global markets.
Such an approach would be to everyone’s benefit, he said,
as successful European companies would help to raise Europe’s profile at a global level.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle with the new US Ambassador, John B. Emerson
Minister Westerwelle returned to the subject on Wednesday (28 August) during his first meeting with the new US Ambassador in Berlin, John B. Emerson:
I call on all members of the Security Council, especially Russia, to take this opportunity now to enable the international community to adopt a firm and united stand against the use of chemical weapons of mass destruction.
He pointed out that the “alleged large-scale use of poison gas” would be a grave violation of the international Chemical Weapons Convention.
Should it be confirmed, he said, a clear international response would be necessary.
Independent investigation crucial
Chemical weapons inspectors at work
Since the allegations surfaced on 21 August, Foreign Minister Westerwelle has been working to bring about a comprehensive and immediate investigation.
The aim was for the mandate of the UN inspectors currently in the country to be extended.
However, the United Nations only managed to reach agreement with the Syrian Government on 25 August.
Once agreement had been reached, Foreign Minister Westerwelle underscored how crucial it was “that the independent United Nations inspectors are now able to investigate these allegations.
They have the technical know-how, they have the instruments to carry out an independent investigation.”
At the weekend, Westerwelle spoke on the telephone to disarmament expert Angela Kane and to his American, Russian and European counterparts.
Sellström in Damascus
In late July, the United Nations reached an agreement with the Syrian Government on sending chemical weapons inspectors to Syria.
They arrived on 18 August.
The 20-strong team is made up of experts from the OPCW, the WHO and the UN.
Government Spokesperson Steffen Seibert made clear on Monday (26 August) that the attack on locations in eastern Ghouta and other districts in the Damascus area was “without a doubt a heinous crime against men, women and children”.
As a party to the Chemical Weapons Convention and a member of the OPCW, Germany actively supports the work of the team of chemical weapons experts.
Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle has repeatedly stated that Germany is prepared to provide the mission with personnel as well as logistical and material support.
Germany welcomes UK’s Security Council initiative
Foreign Minister Westerwelle welcomes the UK’s move to have the UN Security Council address the matter of the poison gas attack in Syria and calls on the Council, especially Russia, to stand united.
Evidence is mounting that chemical weapons have indeed been used in areas east of the Syrian capital.
The United Nations experts currently in Syria intend to continue their work on the ground on Wednesday.
In an interview with the Neue Zürcher Zeitung newspaper this week, Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle emphasised how essential the UN’s work to secure evidence remained.
The German Government is in close contact with its international partners and the UN in view of the dramatic situation.
As Government Spokesperson Steffen Seibert made clear on Wednesday, the German Government welcomes the UK’s move to have the Security Council address the matter of the poison gas attacks in Syria.
At the annual Ambassadors Conference in the Federal Foreign Office on 26 August, Foreign Minister Westerwelle addressed the mounting evidence of the use of chemical weapons by saying that “The use of chemical weapons would be a crime against civilisation.
I welcome the UK’s move to have the UN Security Council now address the matter of the poison gas attack in Syria.
In an interview with the Neue Zürcher Zeitung newspaper (28 August), Westerwelle called it regrettable that the Security Council had been unable to reach a united position for nearly one and a half years because of Russia and China’s stance.
He also reiterated Germany’s support for the UN’s independent inquiry into the allegations.
“Should it be confirmed that chemical weapons of mass destruction have been used,” he went on, “the international community will have to act.
In this case, Germany will be among those who consider that some consequences will have to be drawn.”
Read the interview in full here.
Ban Ki-moon sent the UN High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Germany’s Angela Kane, to Damascus for the negotiations.
UN experts in Syria
The agreement on investigation within Syria initially only covered three locations.
Given the reports of alleged massive use of chemical weapons in eastern Damascus, the UN has now managed to have the mandate extended to include the areas in question.
UN inspectors leave Syria
The experts were flown out of the region on a plane chartered by the German Foreign Office.
Evidence is mounting that chemical weapons have indeed been used in areas east of Damascus, the Syrian capital.
Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle described this as a tangible contribution on the part of Germany to ensuring that the samples collected in Syria could be examined quickly.
He spoke in favour of the international community taking a united stance on the issue of Syria.
Since the allegations about a suspected poison gas attack surfaced, Foreign Minister Westerwelle has been pushing for a comprehensive and immediate investigation.
The inspectors were tasked with investigating the alleged use of chemical weapons in the country.
The 20-strong team was made up of experts from the OPCW, the WHO and the UN and arrived in Syria on 18 August.
It was headed by Professor Åke Sellström of Sweden.
Since the Assad regime for a long time denied the chemical weapons experts access to Syria, the commission started initial investigations in neighbouring countries at the end of June.
Following the reports of alleged massive use of chemical weapons in eastern Damascus, the UN then managed to have the mandate extended to include the areas in question.
The UN team of inspectors arrived in Rotterdam on Saturday – carrying the samples collected in Syria which are to provide evidence about the suspected poison gas attack.
According to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) in The Hague, that precious cargo will now be examined in several laboratories throughout the world to ensure reliable results.
We are making our tangible contribution towards ensuring that the investigations can be swiftly concluded.
He said he had assured UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon of his assistance to help ensure that the results can be made available soon:
Talking about what US Secretary of State John Kerry said on Friday evening about the suspected gas attack, Westerwelle told the Welt am Sonntag as follows:
They clearly point the finger at the Assad regime.
They are plausible.
Secretary of State John Kerry has put forward some strong arguments.
Everyone should take them seriously.
We therefore consider it all the more vital that the United Nations conclude its investigations as swiftly as possible.
We will remain in close consultation with our allies and partners and push for the international community to take a united stance.
Read the full interview with the Welt am Sonntag newspaper (1 September) here.
Westerwelle spoke to his US counterpart, Secretary of State John Kerry, on Friday evening.
Germany neither asked to participate nor considering doing so
Asked whether Germany would participate in any military intervention in Syria, Foreign Minister Westerwelle made the position clear in an interview with the Neue Osnabrücker Zeitung on Saturday:
Germany had not been asked to participate in any military action, he reported, nor was it considering doing so.
We have not been asked to participate in such a move, nor are we considering doing so.
Our constitution and our legal system set narrow parameters for us to work within.
We urge that the Security Council find a united stance and that the work of the UN inspectors be concluded as soon as possible.
We have repeatedly and unequivocally criticised this stance.
After all, Russia has also repeatedly given firm warnings against the use of chemical weapons of mass destruction.
Read the full interview with the Neue Osnabrücker Zeitung (31 August) here.
Minister Westerwelle described this as a “tangible contribution” to ensuring the investigations are swiftly concluded.
Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle told the newspaper Welt am Sonntag that he now expected “analysis of the samples to begin without delay and to be given the utmost priority until completed, before the results are then discussed in the Security Council”.
Their phone call came shortly after Kerry’s presentation of intelligence which he said provided “clear” and “compelling” evidence that Syria’s President Assad was responsible for the alleged gas attack.
The Foreign Minister also criticised Russia’s policy of obstructing progress in the UN Security Council:
I cannot deny that we have been disappointed time and again by the obstructionist policy Russia has pursued on the Syria issue to date.
UN experts’ investigations completed
The chemical weapons experts concluded their investigations in Syria on 30 August and were flown out of the region on a plane chartered by the German Foreign Office.
The UN High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Germany’s Angela Kane, met UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon in New York on Saturday to report on her investigations.
Cultural Preservation Programme of the Federal Foreign Office
The 68th United Nations General Assembly
The following topics will play a particularly significant role during the 68th session:
achieving the Millennium Development Goals by 2015
drafting follow-up goals for the Post-2015 Agenda
implementing the decisions reached at the 2012 UN Conference on Sustainable Development
European Union priorities
The European Union sets priorities for each General Assembly.
peace and security at the international level
sustainable development
Its paper outlining those priorities for the 68th session concentrates on the following areas:
human rights, democracy and the rule of law
reform of the UN system
Germany’s objectives
Alongside the priorities which the EU member states pursue jointly, Germany places special emphasis on the following issues:
protecting human rights and promoting the rule of law
continuing to develop the Millennium Development Goals and drafting a framework for promoting development after 2015
with Germany working to boost multilateral disarmament efforts and
spotlighting the importance of resolutions on nuclear disarmament, conventional arms control and small arms
working for the environment, the climate and sustainable development
continuing to advocate the institutional reform of the United Nations, especially Security Council reform
providing humanitarian aid,
The 68th session of the United Nations General Assembly will begin on 17 September in New York.
The general debate will see the heads of state and government as well as foreign ministers gathered in New York from 24 September to 1 October.
The UN General Assembly will convene for its 68th session on 17 September
As ever, the agenda for this year’s General Assembly will be shaped by the United Nations’ current challenges and those it will be facing over the coming year.
strengthening conflict prevention and peaceful conflict mediation within the UN framework and enhancing peacekeeping and peacebuilding capabilities
strengthening and institutionalising human rights, the rule of law, democracy and the responsibility to protect, and better supporting the development of democratic structures and processes
mitigating the effects of disasters and providing humanitarian assistance, by, for example, reducing disaster risks, bolstering partnerships with the business sector and civil society, and introducing improvements in technology and logistics
cooperating internationally on such global challenges as climate change, the spread of weapons, diseases and terrorism
reforming the United Nations, especially those bodies and procedures which deal with sustainability issues
Comprising all 193 member states, the General Assembly will be chaired for the 2013/14 session by John Ashe, the Ambassador of Antigua and Barbuda to the United Nations in New York.
He was elected as the President of the 68th General Assembly in June and succeeds Serbia’s Vuk Jeremić.
EU Priorities for the UN General Assembly: 68th General Assembly
with a particular focus on strengthening countries’ resilience and identifying new stakeholders with whom to cooperate (regional organisations, the private sector)
sponsoring and negotiating a resolution on Afghanistan, as Germany has done in the past –
the focus being primarily on implementing the measures agreed at the Afghanistan Conferences in Bonn and Tokyo and at the NATO Summit in Chicago, within the UN and elsewhere; advancing civil reconstruction; and insisting on respect for human rights, especially women’s rights, in Afghanistan
fgdgfgfgfgfgfgsdfgsd
Foreign Minister Westerwelle has issued the following statement:
sdfdfdfdfadfsdfdsfdafasdfa Westerwelle dfafdagertrter fedfdfefewrewrewr.
köl int org fdfdffasf.
Wichtig ist, das jetzt nachprüfbare Schritte gegangen werden, diese Vereinbarung umzusetzen. H2
Alleviating suffering in Somalia
Two high-level international conferences are being held in London and Tunis to address the political and humanitarian crisis in Somalia.
Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle is representing Germany at these meetings.
Federal Foreign Minister Westerwelle was in London on 23 February for the first of these events, the London Conference on Somalia organized by the UK.
The situation in the Horn of Africa has long been regarded as difficult.
Political instability, poverty and a lack of security have a negative impact on the entire region.
In London representatives of some 40 participating states and international organizations turned their attention to the Somali Transitional Government’s mandate, which expires in August 2012, and discussed further steps to stabilize Somalia in the long term.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle welcomed the adoption of the resolution and called the strengthening of the African Union Mission a “strong sign of support for Somalia”.
Medical treatment for the people in Somalia
London Conference on Somalia
Text of UN Security Council Resolution 2036 (2012) on the website of the Permanent Mission of Germany to the United Nations in New York
Humanitarian aid for Somalia
The German Government has furthermore made 6 million euro available to international aid organizations in order to assist people in urgent need of help in Somalia.
“Germany will not abandon the people in Somalia and the Horn of Africa,” Foreign Minister Westerwelle said on the sidelines of the Conference.
Germany funds emergency aid project for people in Syria
The United Nations General Assembly condemns Syria in a resolution, 16 February 2012
European Union
The week they spent together in Cologne learning how to lead mixed teams is to be followed by further joint sessions in Dunkirk and Tunis.
During their five days there, they explored various facets of work as an intercultural team leader.
Intercultural learning is the focus of the course.
A Tunisian participant further noted that
A German participant also said that
To be continued in Dunkirk and Tunis
The course will be continued in Dunkirk in March 2014.
Thereafter the participants will travel together to Tunisia for the third and final phase.
The course is also supported by the Franco-German Youth Office.
Learn more about work under the transformation partnership
How are team leaders for international youth exchanges prepared for their tasks?
And how better to learn all this than by studying in an international group?
Seeing things from new perspectives
This immersion in an intercultural group and its dynamics made it possible for participants to view events past and present from a new angle.
The Federal Foreign Office helps finance this project using its transformation partnership funds.
German-French-Tunisian “dialogue among equals”
Shouldn’t their training be just as international and intercultural as their work will be?
Twenty-four young people from Tunisia, Germany and France have just completed the first part of a training course which seeks to put this idea into practice.
Read more about the trinational group’s first impressions of the course here.
Group work and shared fun go hand in hand
“Dialogue among equals” is the motto under which 24 young adults – eight each from Tunisia, Germany and France – undertook to learn the skills required to lead international youth exchanges and to find out more about different cultural backgrounds and the intercultural challenges that crop up during such exchanges.
The participants gathered in Cologne for the first stage of this three-part further-training course.
The predominantly young participants also demonstrated their open-mindedness and revealed their curiosity about their classmates’ cultures.
Their discussion of history – how it is perceived and how it is taught – led them to set aside their own culturally-tainted view of the world and see things in a new light.
For example, a French participant said her eyes had been opened to unexpected differences when she had seen how surprised some of the others were about things that “seem perfectly normal to us”.
“the differences between the cultures gave us a wealth of material to discuss.”
“everyone was able to work well with all the others, discuss things together and have fun!”
When asked what the participants would take home with them from the first week, one of the German participants said she had “loads of great memories” that made her want to come back for “more”.
It is run and organised by the Gustav-Stresemann-Institut e. V. in Bonn, the Centre d’Éducation et de Formation Interculturelles Rencontre (CEFIR) in Dunkirk (France) and the Association des Animateurs de Bir El Bey, Tunis (Tunisia).
The Council of the Baltic Sea States was established in Copenhagen in 1992 on the initiative of the then German and Danish Foreign Ministers, Hans-Dietrich Genscher and Uffe Ellemann-Jensen.
Tasks and objectives
How the Council operates
The foreign ministers met for their most recent session in Kaliningrad, Russia, in June 2013.
Germany’s 2011/2012 Presidency of the CBSS
Our Presidency focused on the modernisation of the south-east Baltic Sea Region, the use of the CBSS as a platform for energy security and the greater involvement of Russia in cooperation in the Baltic Sea Region.
The Bundeswehr must now bid farewell to the German camp in Kunduz.
Together with Minister of Defence de Maizière, Foreign Minister Westerwelle travelled to Afghanistan on 6 October
for the ceremonial handover of the compound to Afghan security forces. It was the first time that both Ministers were in Afghanistan simultaneously.
One last big farewell ceremony – a sign of appreciation for the soldiers and the long-standing civilian-military operations in Kunduz.
At the ceremony, the Foreign Minister expressly thanked all those involved:
“German soldiers, diplomats, police officers and development workers have worked hard in close cooperation with their Afghan partners to build a future for Afghanistan.”
Soon the compound will be shared by the Afghan army and the Afghan police.
“It is our hope and expectation that the Afghan security forces will safeguard, and if necessary restore, security in and around Kunduz. Without security there will be no political and economic development.
..” said Minister of Defence de Maizière.
The NATO combat mission will draw to a close at the end of 2014.
After the ceremonial signing of the contracts, the compound was symbolically handed over to the Afghan Interior Minister Daudzai and Afghan Deputy Minister of Defence Nazari.
Unterschrift close-up
The German Ministers then went on to visit the memorial to the 25 German soldiers who died during their service in Kunduz.
They were accompanied by a mother who had lost her son.
In the afternoon the Ministers travelled back to Germany.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle stressed that Germany’s civil engagement in Afghanistan would continue.
However for the Bundeswehr the Ministers’ visit marks the conclusion
of ten years of civilian-military reconstruction work in Kunduz.
Brazil Guest of Honour at the Book Fair
Brazil Guest of Honour at the Frankfurt Book Fair
Up to 300,000 people are expected to visit during the five days starting on Wednesday.
The Fair is set up to appeal to young and old alike,
Foreign Minister Westerwelle opening the 65th Frankfurt Book Fair
Appropriately enough, there are indeed a lot of voices representing Brazil in Frankfurt:
after Germany assumed the role of Guest of Honour at the Rio de Janeiro Book Fair just over a month ago.
That showcase of German publishers and authors took place as part of the Germany Year in Brazil 2013/14,
which is seeing German business, culture, education and research foregrounded in Brazil for twelve months in order to generate increased interest in Germany.
German literature with Brazilian roots
saying that anyone who discovered and learned to love the world of literature as a child would be unwilling to do without it later in life.
Westerwelle went on to welcome Brazil as the Guest of Honour and commend the works of such Brazil authors as Jorge Amado and Paulo Coelho.
He also spotlighted the little-known Brazilian roots of some German contributions to world literature,
A Book Fair in the digital age
Up to 300,000 visitors are expected at the Frankfurt Book Fair this year.
Next to books, digital media are also playing an increasingly crucial role in the global knowledge-based society.
He cited Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff as having expressed this clearly at the United Nations General Assembly in New York.
We need to join forces with like-minded partners if our values and interests are to have a voice on the world stage.
Brazil is the Guest of Honour at the 65th Book Fair.
Focus on Childhood and Youth at the Weltempfang forum
The forum is centring this year around a Focus on Childhood and Youth.
Peace Prize goes to Belarus
At the end, the Peace Prize of the German Book Trade will be awarded in the Paulskirche in Frankfurt on 13 October.
This year the Prize is to go to Belarusian writer Svetlana Alexievich.
Full text of the speech by Foreign Minister Westerwelle at the opening of the Frankfurt Book Fair
Frankfurt Book Fair website
Literature promotion by the Federal Foreign Office
German-Brazilian relations
Arraiolos Meeting of Presidents in Krakow
From 7 to 9 October Federal President Joachim Gauck was in Krakow in Poland for a three-day visit. He took part in the Arraiolos Meeting of non-executive Presidents in the EU on 8 and 9 October.
The meeting of Heads of State from Poland, Italy, Latvia, Finland, Portugal and Germany, with the guests from Estonia and Bulgaria, is named after the place where the first meeting was held in 2003, in the Portuguese town of Arraiolos.
The Federal President already met with his Polish and Italian counterparts, Bronisław Komorowski und Giorgio Napolitano, on the evening of 7 October, before the three Presidents held talks with the Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych.
The discussion was centred on the domestic situation in Ukraine in the run up to the European Union Eastern Partnership Summit, scheduled to take place on 28 and 29 November in Vilnius.
In recent months Ukraine has shown a clear desire to draw closer to the EU.
Ukrainian civil society and the opposition strongly advocate a pro-European course for their country, and the former Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko has also spoken out in favour of association with the EU.
Ukraine has already set some reforms in motion in order to fulfil the conditions laid out by the EU for the Agreement to be signed.
Nonetheless some important measures have yet to be implemented, such as reform of the judiciary or arrangements for parliamentary elections.
Moreover the EU expects the case of the imprisoned Yulia Tymoshenko to be resolved.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle opened the 65th Frankfurt Book Fair today (8 October) in conjunction with Brazilian Vice-President Michel Temer.
Brazil is the Guest of Honour at this year’s Fair.
“A land full of voices” –
With more than 7300 exhibitors from over 100 different countries, the world’s largest Book Fair has yet again turned Frankfurt into a real hub for authors, publishers, booksellers, journalists and literature lovers from around the world.
with this year’s focus on children’s and youth media intended to attract younger bookworms in particular.
Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle opened the 65th Frankfurt Book Fair on Tuesday evening (8 October) in conjunction with Brazilian Vice-President Michel Temer.
Brazil’s Cultural Affairs Minister, Marta Suplicy, was also present at the opening.
As this year’s Guest of Honour, Brazil is presenting itself at the Book Fair under the slogan “A land full of voices”.
more than 90 authors from South America’s largest state have announced their attendance.
Brazil’s presence at the Frankfurt Book Fair is something of a reciprocation,
Foreign Minister Westerwelle at the Book Fair with Brazil’s Vice-President Temer and Cultural Affairs Minister Suplicy
Foreign Minister Westerwelle began his opening speech by commending the decision to highlight children’s and young people’s literature at this year’s Book Fair,
pointing out that Thomas Mann’s mother was Brazilian and provided the inspiration behind his character Gerda Buddenbrook.
Westerwelle underlined Germany’s commitment alongside Brazil to promoting an open, independent and secure Internet.
Protecting intellectual property in this digital age and maintaining a sensible balance between freedom and security online were tasks, he said, that no state could accomplish alone:
The Federal Foreign Office has participated in Frankfurt’s international Book Fair since 2007 by running the Weltempfang forum.
The forum provides intermediary organisations active in cultural relations and education policy as well as German authors and translators with an opportunity to present themselves to the public.
Readings, talks and discussions open windows onto the ways children grow up in situations of economic crisis or escalating conflict, as well as examining the secret of a good children’s book.
The Frankfurt Book Fair is being held from 9 to 13 October 2013.
The author lives in Minsk and has written, among other subjects, about the nuclear disaster in Chernobyl, the Soviet-Afghan war and the break-up of the Soviet Union.
The focus of the discussions was on the following issues: ways out of the crisis in Europe, transatlantic relations and the third Eastern Partnership Summit.
At the summit the signing of an EU Association Agreement with Ukraine will be addressed, amongst other issues.
Jobseeker’s visa
The Federal Republic of Germany’s commitment to the common United Nations goals is evident in the dynamic development of the UN in Germany.
The UN presence is focused on Bonn, where the UN Campus was opened in July 2006.
Federal President Gauck visiting the UN Campus
In visiting United Nations headquarters in Bonn on 12 September 2013 – during the jubilee year marking 40 years since Germany joined the UN – Federal President Joachim Gauck recognised the work done by the United Nations in the pursuit of peace, development and sustainability.
The UN Campus in Bonn is now used by numerous UN organisations.
A number of important UN institutions are also to be found in Berlin, Hamburg and Frankfurt am Main.
The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the World Bank, the International Labour Organization and the World Food Programme all have offices in Berlin.
Frankfurt am Main is home to the World Bank Group’s International Finance Corporation.
In establishing it, UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan and Federal Chancellor Angela Merkel clearly signalled their intention to continue consolidating their cooperation.
The United Nations in Germany
The UN Campus in Bonn was opened in 2006.
The UN organisations in Germany – a brief introduction
It now houses 19 of the 27 United Nations offices based in Germany.
The Federal Republic of Germany’s commitment to the common United Nations goals is evident in the dynamic development of the UN in Germany.
Bonn is the main location, and the opening of the UN Campus here in July 2006 by UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan and Federal Chancellor Angela Merkel clearly signalled their intention to continue consolidating their cooperation..
Haus Carstanjen on the bank of the Rhine
The Federal City of Bonn is now home to numerous large and small UN organisations, programmes and offices.
There have been UN institutions based here since 1951.
The largest and most well-known of the organisations, for example, is the Secretariat of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, which monitors compliance with the Kyoto Protocol.
Support from other institutions concerned with development and environment issues
The national flags of UN member states on Olof-Palme-Platz in Bonn
There are now around 150 institutions concerned with development or environment policy which have their headquarters or offices in Bonn. Among them are the Center for Development Research, the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH, the German Development Institute and many semi-governmental, church and private institutions.
A summary of all UN organisations based in Germany is available here.
The UN in Bonn – working towards sustainable development worldwide PDF | 839 KB
The UN Tower, known as "Langer Eugen", is situated directly on the Rhine.
The UN Campus in Bonn
The largest and most well-known of the organisations, for example, is the Secretariat of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), which monitors compliance with the Kyoto Protocol.
Alongside the UNFCCC Secretariat with its some 550 employees, there are many more organisations which employ around 450 further members of staff.
Bild: Haus Carstanjen on the bank of the Rhine
The relocation of the United Nations Volunteers programme (UNV) in 1996 was in a sense the breakthrough for the development of the UN Campus in Bonn. Today, the location is viewed as a hub of international politics in the fields of climate change, development and sustainability.
In light of the steadily growing need for space, the Federal Government first provided the United Nations with its own premises in the Bad Godesberg area of Bonn by making Haus Carstanjen available to it in 1996. Soon after, more UN Secretariats moved in there.
As a result, the UN acquired premises which were not only equipped to international standards but established at a location which played an important part in shaping Germany’s new postwar democracy.
Since 2006 nearly all UN organisations have been based in Langer Eugen.
Following extensive refurbishment and construction measures, the Altes Abgeordnetenhochhaus was also handed over to the UN on 15 July 2013.
The Secretariat of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) is transferring some of its staff from Haus Carstanjen to the Altes Abgeordnetenhochhaus in autumn 2013.
Furthermore, due to the considerable growth in UNFCCC staff, work has begun on planning another new office building, which is set to complete the UN Campus in 2017.
Bonn is well prepared for the expansion of the UN presence: the World Conference Centre Bonn (WCCB), situated right next to the UN Campus, is being expanded by a new complex that will include a 3500-seat conference hall.
In addition, UN organisations can use the plenary area of the old Bundestag complex – the plenary chamber and the Altes Wasserwerk.
The focus of so many Bonn UN organisations on sustainable development reflects the great importance which Germany attaches to development and the environment, issues of crucial importance for the future.
Amended Protocol II
The CCW currently comprises the chapeau Convention and the following Protocols:
Protocol III on Incendiary Weapons,
Protocol IV on Blinding Laser Weapons, and
Protocol V on Explosive Remnants of War.
Meetings of the States parties to the CCW are held once a year in Geneva, as are annual Conferences of High Contracting Parties to Amended Protocol II and to Protocol V, as well as Meetings of Experts on these two Protocols.
Protocol V to the UN Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons is based on the fact that explosive remnants of war, such as unexploded and abandoned ordnance, present a serious danger to the civilian population and frequently impede reconstruction following armed conflict.
Protocol V is thus an important addition to the CCW.
The Federal Government is actively encouraging other states to ratify Protocol V.
Amended Protocol II to the CCW on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Mines, Booby-Traps and Other Devices has retained its significance notwithstanding the entry into force of the Ottawa Convention.
The German armed forces have, since 2010, met a key requirement: since that date, the only anti-vehicle mines supplied to the German military for use have been ones with a limited active life.
Germany is a State party to the UN Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons and its five Protocols. On 3 March 2005, Germany deposited its instrument of acceptance of Protocol V (Explosive Remnants of War) with the UN Secretary-General as the depositary of the CCW, the fifth State party to do so.
Germany had already deposited its instrument of acceptance of the Amendment to Article 1 of the CCW on 26 January 2005, pursuant to which the scope of application of the Convention and Protocols I to V was extended to include non-international armed conflicts.
The Amendment to Article 1 thus entered into force for Germany on 26 July 2005.
Negotiations on a protocol on cluster munitions were also conducted within the framework of the CCW, separately from the so-called “Oslo Process” which resulted in the Convention on Cluster Munitions that entered into force on 1 August 2010.
Documents
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC)
A facility for the destruction of chemical weapons in Munster
The Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), which entered into force on 29 April 1997, prohibits the development, production, possession, transfer and use of chemical weapons.
Sixteen years on from its entry into force, the CWC has proven to be one of our most successful disarmament treaties.
Universal application of the CWC almost achieved
To date, 190 states have acceded to the Convention.
The CWC is of particular importance in terms of disarmament policy. It is the only multilateral disarmament treaty to oblige States Parties to destroy an entire category of weapons of mass destruction under international supervision.
The United Nations in Germany
Headquarters and offices of various UN institutions are to be found in other German cities too.
The Hanseatic City of Hamburg, for instance, is the seat of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea and of the UNESCO Institute for Lifelong Learning.
The most recent addition to the list is Dresden, where the United Nations University Institute for Integrated Management of Material Fluxes and of Resources (UNU-FLORES) has begun operations.
The Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
The OPCW's job is to implement, monitor and develop the CWC.
Regular inspections in the chemical industry relevant to the CWC are intended to guarantee that its activities only serve purposes which are not prohibited.
The OPCW also promotes international cooperation for peaceful purposes in the chemical sphere.
Every five years, a special conference reviews implementation of the CWC and submits recommendations on the future direction of the OPCW’s work. The third such conference was held in The Hague from 9 to 18 April 2013.
Destruction of chemical weapons
This is because the environmentally sound destruction of stocks creates a greater financial, technological and administrative burden than originally assumed.
Iraq only acceded to the CWC in 2009 and is working on completely destroying the remainder of its former chemical weapons stockpiles.
EU offers support through the CFSP
The EU has supported the work of the OPCW since 2004 with several Joint Actions (2004, 2005 and 2007) and two Council Decisions (2009 and 2012) as part of the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP).
The first focus is on projects to help States Parties transpose their CWC obligations into national law.
The second focus involved projects to promote the universal application of the CWC.
Germany and the CWC
Chemical weapons produced pre-1946 are defined as “old chemical weapons”; these also have to be destroyed.
Thanks in no small part to the highly cooperative attitude of German industry, they have been able to document Germany’s successful implementation of and compliance with the CWC.
The Federal Office of Economics and Export Control (BAFA) is responsible for collating and processing data from the chemical industry as specified in the CWC as well as for issuing authorisations.
The States Parties have to declare all their stocks of chemical weapons and destroy them with international supervision.
The entry into force on 14 October 2013 of Syria's accession – Syria being a state which possesses chemical weapons – was yet another milestone on the road toward worldwide application of the CWC.
Only six states have not yet acceded to the CWC (Angola, Egypt, Israel, Myanmar, North Korea and South Sudan).
List of OPCW States Parties
One of its main activities is to systematically record and verify the destruction of all chemical weapons and all facilities for producing such weapons.
Chemical industry inspection across the world are intended to bolster the global community's confidence that the CWC is being upheld.
It furthermore has an obligation to coordinate measures to protect and help the victims of a chemical weapons attack in an emergency.
The organisation with the most employees, for example, is the Secretariat of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), which monitors compliance with the Kyoto Protocol.
The remarkable number of UN organisations based in Germany, and particularly in Bonn, which focus on environmental protection and sustainable development underlines the great importance which Germany attaches to development and the environment, issues of crucial importance for the future.
The organisation in Bonn with the most employees, for example, is the Secretariat of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), which monitors compliance with the Kyoto Protocol.
Alongside the 550 employees in the UNFCCC Secretariat, around 450 further members of staff are employed by UN organisations in the Federal City.
In light of the steadily growing need for space, the Federal Government first provided the United Nations with its own premises on the Rhine by making the historical Haus Carstanjen available to it in 1996.
As the number of UN staff in Bonn has increased from just a few dozen in the mid-nineties to almost 1000 today, the German Government decided in 2003 to place a large part of the former German Bundestag area at the disposal of the UN.
The Langer Eugen (named after the former Bundestag President Eugen Gerstenmaier) and Altes Abgeordnetenhochhaus office buildings, together with Haus Carstanjen, were to form the UN Campus.
Thus premises were made available to the United Nations which were not only equipped to international standards but established at a location which played an important part in shaping Germany's new postwar democracy.
Following extensive refurbishment and construction measures, the Altes Abgeordnetenhochhaus, formerly a wing of the German Bundestag, was also handed over to the UN on 15 July 2013.
The Secretariat of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) moved in with part of its staff in autumn 2013.
Bonn is well prepared for the expansion of the UN presence: the World Conference Center Bonn (WCCB), situated right next to the UN Campus, is being expanded by a new complex that will include a 3500-seat conference hall.
In addition, UN organisations can use the plenary area of the old Bundestag complex.
The OPCW acts through the annual Conference of the States Parties, its Executive Council (the 41-member permanent executive organ, of which Germany is a member) and its Technical Secretariat.
The OPCW Technical Secretariat has been headed by Director-General Ahmet Üzümcü of Turkey since July 2010.
The OPCW received the Nobel Peace Prize on 11 October 2013.
Germany's Statement on the 3rd CWC Review Conference, 8-19 April 2013 (PDF, 104 KB)
The destruction of Syria's chemical weapons has been at the forefront of world affairs ever since they were used in Ghouta (Syria) on 21 August 2013.
Syria had an accelerated procedure to completely destroy its chemical weapons stocks imposed on it by the OPCW Executive Council decision on the destruction of Syria's chemical weapons and UN Security Council Resolution 2118 (both dated 27 September 2013).
These decisions were preceded by the framework for the destruction of Syria's chemical weapons that the United States and Russia agreed on 14 September and Syria's own declaration on the same day that it would accede to the CWC and apply it immediately although the accession would not officially take effect until 14 October.
There is a strict timetable planned for destroying the weapons.
Syria faces restrictive measures if it fails to comply with these decisions.
This would, however, require further resolutions from the UN Security Council.
Syria has destroyed some initial chemical weapons facilities during an OPCW mission.
The German Government is supporting the OPCW in this historic challenge.
UN Security Council Resolution 2118
OPCW executive decision on the Destruction of Syrian Chemical Weapons
Supervised by the OPCW, chemical weapons are continually being destroyed around the world.
More than 81 per cent (around 54,000 tonnes) of the world's declared stockpiles have been destroyed.
While several countries have destroyed their stockpiles within the allotted timeframe, the US, Russia and Libya did not meet the deadline specified in the CWC (29 April 2012).
The US has now destroyed around 90 per cent of its chemical weapons, Russia 74 per cent and Libya 85 per cent.
According to the countries themselves, the work should take until 2023 (US), 2015 (Russia) and 2016 (Libya) respectively.
Held in 2011, the 16th Conference of the States Parties placed all states which possess chemical weapons under an obligation to continue destroying them under international supervision and expand their duties with respect to reporting and transparency.
In this way, the EU is contributing to the fight against chemical weapons being used in terrorist attacks.
European Council Decision 2012/712/CFSP
EU Declaration at the 3rd Review Conference in The Hague, 8-19 April 2013
Germany is helping eliminate chemical weapons in various ways in several different countries.
It has supported the current UN and OPCW mission in Syria since April 2013 by providing two million euros, training for OPCW staff and air transport to Syria.
Since as early as 2002, Germany has been helping Russia bilaterally as part of the G8 Global Partnership initiative as well as through considerable EU contributions and projects to destroy chemical weapons.
To completely eliminate the chemical weapons in Libya, Germany has been providing the OPCW with logistical support and is running a project in collaboration with the US and Libya to establish a destruction facility in Libya.
In Iraq too, Germany is working on solutions to destroy the remaining stocks of Iraqi chemical weapons in conjunction with the OPCW.
In all the time since the Federal Republic was established, Germany has never possessed chemical weapons.
By April 2007, Germany had finished destroying all the chemical weapons stocks that had been produced by the German Empire before 1945.
Further "old chemical weapons" are still regularly found in the ground, however. These are then declared and destroyed.
The Federal Armed Forces Verification Centre is responsible for cataloguing "old chemical weapons" and collating the data for the OPCW.
The OPCW has been carrying out regular inspections in the chemical industry since 1997.
The CWC goes beyond the prohibition and destruction of a category of weapons of mass destruction, as codified in the BWC, by also ensuring international monitoring of destruction and inspection of the chemical industry.
Long-term support for Afghanistan
Foreign Minister Westerwelle with Afghan Defence Minister Mohammadi
Information on Germany's work for Afghanistan
On 24 October, Foreign Minister Westerwelle welcomed Afghanistan’s Defence Minister Bismillah Khan Mohammadi to the Federal Foreign Office in Berlin.
Their talks focused on the security situation in Afghanistan, progress made in the transfer of security responsibility and long-term support to be provided to Afghanistan after 2014, when international combat troops have withdrawn.
The nearly normal state of emergency
How do you overcome political upheaval and curfews when on a posting?
Our colleagues Ramesh de Silva and Janina Markewitsch at the Embassy in Cairo report on their “daily life” .
What do you do when political upheaval erupts?
How do you cope with life under curfew?
And how can you answer the question that we are often asked, “and what does the Embassy say about that?”
Our colleagues Janina Markewitsch and Ramesh de Silva, responsible for press and culture respectively at the Embassy in Cairo, report on their “daily life” – the circumstances of which change nearly every day.
The schools had already shut, the Cairenes had gone to the coast and the city was gearing up for the heat of summer and Ramadan.
The Embassy’s plans for the rest of the year had been finalised, the funding had been secured –
back to school on 1 September and back to work for all German institutions in the country after the summer break, Day of German Unity on 3 October to be ushered in by “Cairo-Berlin Week”.
By the end of June, all kinds of events were already lined up for autumn.
Bild: Protests in Egypt
Yet not everything went to plan – as has often been the case in Egypt ever since early 2011.
Following massive protests President Morsi was ousted on 3 July.
The weeks of Ramadan, usually a period of contemplation, became a time marred by protests, clashes and violence.
Every day the situation escalated, there were many deaths, injuries and an atmosphere of highly charged debate reigned.
Since the worst confrontations mid-August, a night-time curfew has been imposed, the new Government has declared a state of emergency in the cities.
When you live here it does not take long for you to learn to recognise and avoid hordes of people, to work with an ear cocked to the radio or an eye on the Internet in order to leave the office early if need be, or to equip your apartment for any eventuality by stocking up on enough food and drinking water.
Night time – a city transformed
The curfew transforms Cairo.
Places where crowds of people would otherwise throng late into the night are now eerily empty.
Parties wind down in the early evening and events are cancelled or postponed.
In the evenings internet connections are overload, DVD collections and cookbooks become highly-prized goods amongst the expat community.
Then the next morning you can read the papers and find out where clashes flared up and where people once again had to die.
Conflicting death tolls abound, muddled conspiracy theories do the rounds and the country remains deeply divided between supporters of the interim Government and the followers of the ex-President Morsi.
Work is different too
Bild: Reception at the German Embassy in Cairo on 3 October
The upheaval has also resulted in many changes for us here at the Embassy.
Contacts in the ministries are replaced, the start of the school year and many experts’ return to the country are postponed.
In view of this, plans are adapted to the circumstances – the events of “Cairo-Berlin Week” will mostly take place at a later date, project trips have been postponed until next year and at the reception on the Day of German Unity the guests had to go home earlier than usual, due to the curfew.
We are keenly following the new interim Government’s road map.
Will there soon be a new constitution, parliamentary elections and a newly-elected president?
Will humans rights violations be punished, reconciliation initiatives be launched or will the polarisation only persist?
Will the press once again take to criticising the Government, as it was in the habit of doing during Morsi’s time in office, or will everyone rally around the new leadership and Defence Minister al-Sisi.
The unforeseen and daily life
Every day brings with it a new surprise.
It is not only the security situation that must be re-evaluated on a daily basis.
On the Fridays when the followers of the ousted President continue to demonstrate, the situation is particularly difficult to predict from week to week.
Bild: Cairo
Yet life goes on.
People take the metro to work, shop at markets or meet friends and family at a corner shisha bar.
Our daily life also carries on.
We do not have any less work as a result of the events.
Some projects are interrupted, yet some long-awaited authorisations arrive all at once.
We send daily updates on the latest developments to the Federal Foreign Office in Berlin and reassure friends and family in Germany that, despite the impression one could sometimes get from watching German television, we are not living in a city in the midst of a civil war.
The hope prevails that the situation in Cairo will stabilise again and that there will be a fresh start for democracy. That the economy will get back into gear and there will be more social justice.
That is ultimately why people took to the streets in January 2011.
Above all, we hope that people will come together to start to breach the gulf between the estranged camps in the country.
We will continue to closely follow events in the upcoming months and with exchanges, projects and events we hope be able to make some small contribution.
Click here for more reports from our “On a diplomatic mission” series.
Two countries facing major challenges
South Sudan gained independence on 9 July 2011 and a few days later became the 193rd country to be admitted to the United Nations.
However, crises and conflicts continue to threaten both the Sudan and South Sudan.
Since independence, Sudan has been plagued by crises and conflicts – between North and South, in the Darfur region, and in Eastern Sudan.
In 2005 a peace agreement was reached between the Sudanese central government in the North and the rebels in Southern Sudan, bringing to an end the longest civil war in African history.
However, both countries – the new state of South Sudan and the Sudan to the north – still face major challenges.
In South Sudan before independence
The Sudan and South Sudan are two of the poorest countries in the world and also two of the most indebted.
In many parts of both countries, people’s food situation is alarming.
Many are dependent on humanitarian aid from the international community.
Water shortages and desertification are widespread and hamper the development of the two countries.
Since the Convention entered into force in 1994, the work of this multilateral project has focused on promoting sustainable development in arid ecosystems.
Its aim is to prevent increasing areas of land turning into desert and to alleviate the effects of drought in Africa in particular.
Secretariat of the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (UNEP/CMS):The Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals, which is also known as the Bonn Convention, was concluded by 116 countries in 1979.
It is administered by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and lays down binding norms for the global protection of species under threat.
Under its auspices, a number of international agreements relating to particular migratory species have also been concluded.
Secretariat of the Agreement on the Conservation of African-Eurasian Migratory Waterbirds (UNEP/AEWA)This is an international agreement concluded in 1995 under the auspices of the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS).
The Agreement protects 255 species of waterbirds in 119 countries.
Secretariat of the Agreement on the Conservation of Small Cetaceans of the Baltic, North East Atlantic, Irish and North Seas (UNEP/ASCOBANS)The Agreement concluded by 10 European countries in 1991 protects all species of small cetaceans in the North and Baltic Seas with the exception of sperm whales.
The Secretariat collects and disseminates relevant information on the implementation of the Agreement, organises the meetings of the Agreement’s bodies and Advisory Committees as well as assisting with their work.
Secretariat of the Agreement on the Conservation of Populations of European Bats (UNEP/EUROBATS)The Agreement was concluded in 1991 under UNEP/CMS auspices.
It provides for the protection of 52 European bat species, the monitoring of bat populations and the identification of key bat conservation habitats.
Secretariat of the Intergovernmental Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) The UN General Assembly gave the go-ahead for the establishment of the Platform on 21 December 2010.
UNESCO International Centre for Technical and Vocational Education and Training (UNESCO-UNEVOC)The Centre is dedicated to helping UNESCO member states all over the world to develop and improve their vocational training systems as well as further training in the workplace.
It coordinates around 280 organisations and institutions in the sphere of vocational training in 165 countries, including national ministries and research institutes.
Secretariat of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) was concluded in 1992 to help countries address the challenges associated with climate change.
The aim is to achieve sustainable levels of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere.
The Kyoto Protocol adopted in 1997 spells out a number of its commitments in more concrete terms.
Furthermore, the Secretariat organises conferences and assists governments and institutions in developing technology aimed at countering the consequences of climate change.
United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UNISDR) – Bonn Office
The task of UNISDR is to mobilise and support actors and resources at national, regional and international level in the ISDR system to strengthen disaster reduction.
The Bonn office maintains contact with the UN organisations in Bonn and relevant German institutions (e.g. the German Committee for Disaster Reduction).
UN Platform for Space-Based Information for Disaster Management and Emergency Response (UN-SPIDER)
SPIDER, a programme operated by the UN Office for Outer Space Affairs (OOSA) in Vienna, was adopted at the recommendation of the UN Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (COPUOS) by the UN General Assembly on 14 December 2006.
It is intended to greatly enhance access to space data for disaster prevention and management. Moreover it functions as an internationally recognised interface between space agencies and users, thus making possible rapid orientation in the event of disaster and ensuring access to space-based information for states affected as well as for national and international aid organisations.
United Nations Regional Information Centre (UNRIC) – German liaison officeThe United Nations Regional Information Centre (UNRIC) in Brussels and its German liaison office in Bonn serve as the UN’s contact point in Germany.
As part of the UN Department of Public Information, UNRIC’s main task is to disseminate information on the work of the United Nations.
United Nations University – Institute for Environment and Human Security (UNU-EHS)The staff of the Institute for Environment and Human Security (UNU-EHS) carry out research into the vulnerability of societies facing natural and human-induced hazards, e.g. natural and environmental disasters.
United Nations University – International Human Dimensions Programme on Global Environmental Change (UNU-IHDP)The aim of the Secretariat of the international interdisciplinary programme IHDP established in Bonn in 1996 is to interlink and further develop research into the causes and impact of human intervention on the global environment.
United Nations University – Institute for Sustainability and Peace (UNU-ISP), Operating Unit SCYCLE The Operating Unit SCYCLE seeks to enable societies to reduce the environmental burden of the production, use and disposal of consumer goods.
SCYCLE – a unit of the Institute for Sustainability and Peace based in Tokyo – stands for “sustainable cycles”.
United Nations University – Vice Rectorate in Europe (UNU-ViE):UNU-ViE was established as the first UNU Vice Rectorate outside the UNU main headquarters in Tokyo.
The aim of the Vice Rectorate is to strengthen the presence of the UNU in Europe and to develop close ties among bodies in the UN system, governments, universities and research institutes, as well as other agencies.
In doing so, it acts as a forum for dialogue and an exchange of ideas, particularly on the development of capacities in developing countries.
The Vice Rectorate in Europe focuses on questions relating to science and technology in the service of human safety, as well as sustainability research and e-learning.
United Nations Volunteers Programme (UNV)Since 1970, UNV has been the central coordinating body for voluntary service within the United Nations.
UNV mobilises experienced and committed people who – either in the field or online – volunteer their time and expertise to support development.
In 2011, almost 7300 volunteers were serving in 132 states and 36 UN organisations.
The programme is run by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
UN Water Decade Programme on Capacity Development (UNW-DPC)The aim of the programme office, which is under the auspices of the UN University, is to coordinate and enhance the activities of the more than two dozen UN organisations working together within the framework of UN-Water in the fields of vocational training and institutional capacity development.
UN-Water focuses on realising the water-related Millennium Goals.
World Tourism Organization Consulting Unit on Tourism and BiodiversityA World Tourism Organization Consulting Unit was set up in October 2006 on the UN Campus in Bonn to support countries in Asia affected by the tsunami so that they could combine the reconstruction of tourist infrastructure with measures aimed at protecting biodiversity.
Due to the successful work of the Consulting Unit in Thailand and Indonesia and the continued financial support provided by the German Government, projects on protecting biodiversity in the sphere of tourism are now being implemented around the world.
The Consulting Unit supports the development of sustainable tourism based on the guidelines of the Convention on Biological Diversity.
World Health Organization – European Centre for Environment and Health (WHO-ECEH)
The centre is an office of the WHO and provides information and advice to the media, society and member states on the impact of environmental hazards on people’s health.
It focuses in particular on air, noise, housing, healthy working conditions and chemical safety.
International Labour Organization - Representation in Germany (ILO)
The International Labour Organization, founded in Geneva in 1919, is the specialised agency of the United Nations responsible for labour and social policy.
The International Labour Conference which takes place annually at the International Labour Office, the organisation's permanent secretariat, crafts and adopts international agreements in important areas of labour and social policy.
Over time this has lead to a network of international rules being created, which serves to protect working people's rights around the world and which is aimed at securing fair international competition.
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees - Regional Representation for Germany, Austria and the Czech Republic (UNHCR)
UNHCR activities in Germany focus on the field of legal protection for asylum seekers and recognised refugees.
The UNHCR Agency's legal advisers comment on codes of practice as well as amendments to the content of asylum law, sometimes at the request of governmental agencies or the German Bundestag and its committees, from an international perspective.
World Food Programme - Liaison Office in Germany (WFP)
As the most important United Nations institution in the fight against hunger the UN World Food Programme (WFP) must always react swiftly to emergencies.
At the same time it works on ensuring long-term food security.
World Bank Office in Berlin
The World Bank supports developing countries around the world by means of financial and technical assistance.
It provides low-interest or interest-free loans for investment in education, health, public administration, infrastructure, the development of the private and financial sectors, agriculture and the management of natural resources.
United Nations University - Institute for Integrated Management of Material Fluxes and of Resources (UNU-FLORES)
UNU-FLORES plans international strategies on sustainable use of resources, particularly the integrated management of natural resources such as water, soil and waste.
The focus lies on emerging and developing countries.
Water, soil, waste management and contaminated sites are all topics of research.
International Finance Corporation (IFC) of the World Bank
The IFC deals with the fields of investment, advice and wealth management on behalf of the World Bank, and offers its knowledge to customers in more than 100 developing countries.
Within this context it provides companies with both short and long-term financing solutions which are also combined with advice on boosting growth.
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (ITLOS)
The international Tribunal for the Law of the Sea was established pursuant to the1982 Convention on the Law of the Sea and has been based in Hamburg since 1996.
Its 21 judges can be called upon to settle disputes between States Parties to the Convention regarding issues of navigation, use of the ocean floor, fishing and the marine environment.
UNESCO Institute for Lifelong Learning (UIL)
The UNESCO Institute for Lifelong Learning, founded in 1951, is a non-profit international research, information, training, documentation and publication centre of UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation).
As one of three educational institutes of UNESCO the UIP concentrates primarily on adult and further education, literacy and non-formal basic education with a view to lifelong learning.
Nuremberg
UNHCR Nuremberg
The Sub-Office in Nuremberg coordinates its work with the Federal Office for Migration and Refugees (BAMF).
Click here to find out more about the work and addresses of the UN institutions in Germany:
United Nations Regional Information Centre for Western Europe (UNRIC)
Yet both countries are rich in mineral resources, including oil, ore and precious metals, particularly gold; water from the Nile; and potentially fertile arable land.
The North-South peace process
In recent years the political process between the Sudan and South Sudan has been shaped by the guidelines of the 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA).
The CPA ended the civil war that had lasted since 1982 between the Sudanese Government and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army (SPLM/A), the largest rebel movement in Southern Sudan.
The agreement set out a six-year transition period, democratic presidential and parliamentary elections and a referendum on the independence of South Sudan.
The elections took place in April 2010, the referendum in January 2011.
The 2010 elections
Between 11 and 14 April 2010, the first comprehensive elections since 1986 were held in the as yet undivided Sudan.
Although irregularities meant they did not meet international standards, they did constitute a step towards greater openness in politics.
President Omar Al-Bashir won the elections in the North, taking 68 per cent of the votes.
Elections were also held to select a President for South Sudan, appoint governors and arrange the composition of the national and regional parliaments.
With President Salva Kiir, the SPLM gained 93 per cent of the votes.
Southern Sudan’s independence
Celebrations in Juba on the founding of Africa’s 54th state
In a referendum on 9 January 2011, 98.8 per cent of the population of Southern Sudan had voted for independence.
After decades of civil war and immeasurable suffering for the civilian population, the peaceful conduct of the elections, the referendum and the division of what had been the largest country in Africa were not to be taken for granted.
The United Nations is lending support to the new state through its peace mission UNMISS (United Nations Mission in South Sudan).
The mission’s aim is to help South Sudan as the state establishes itself – for instance encouraging post-conflict rehabilitation and good governance, strengthening civil society and human rights, reforming the security sector, and disarming, demobilising and integrating former combatants.
The mission has up to 7000 international soldiers and 900 police officers at its disposal, among them up to 50 German soldiers and up to ten German police officers.
Other outstanding issues
Nonetheless,the Sudan and South Sudan still face major challenges.
South Sudan needs to develop viable state structures, bring about socio-economic development and ensure speedy delivery of basic services to the population.
In the Sudan, rebels of the SPLA - North have again been fighting the Government in Khartoum since June 2011.
In South Sudan too, there have been increased clashes between the SPLA and opposing militia groups since 2011.
Conflict in Abyei
However, fundamental issues between South Sudan and the North remain unresolved, such as the precise positioning of the border.
The main point here concerns the border regions claimed by both sides, namely Abyei, Kafia Kingi and Kiir River.
South Kordofan and Blue Nile
According to the CPA, these regions are to be granted an autonomous status worked out by local parliaments.
The parliamentary and gubernatorial election in the South Kordofan border region provided for in the CPA were held in May 2011 without any major irregularities.
Governor Ahmad Haroun, who is wanted by the ICC, and the National Congress Party (NCP) won by a narrow margin, gaining 49.8 per cent of the votes.
The SPLM refused to recognise the outcome
On 10 April 2012, the South Sudanese army occupied oil production facilities owned by the Republic of the Sudan in Heglig, South Kordofan, and claimed the area for itself.
On 2 May 2012, the United Nations Security Council passed in Resolution 2046 condemning the fighting and calling for the start of peace talks between the North and the South.
The United Nations Security Council has threatened both parties with sanctions if they do not heed the resolution.
A peace agreement between the Sudan and South Sudan, which was drawn up on 27 September 2012 to plan border demarcation, the distribution of oil revenues and the establishment of a demilitarised zone separating the two countries is being only very hesitantly implemented by either side.
Mounted Janjaweed militiamen in Darfur
The security situation in Darfur remains critical.
In the Darfur region to the west, various ethnic groups are competing for scarce resources.
Around two and a half million people have been forced to flee.
Qatar hosted the Darfur peace negotiations at international level in Doha.
In close collaboration with United Nations/African Union Chief Negotiator Djibril Bassolé, the emirate mediated between the Sudanese Government and the rebel groups JEM and LJM.
Other important rebel groups such as JEM have, however, not signed the document.
A reconstruction conference was held in Doha, Qatar, under the aegis of the peace agreement on 7 and 8 April 2013. The international community pledged 3.7 billion US dollars in reconstruction assistance,
with Germany contributing 16 million euros.
This mission protects civilian and humanitarian aid workers from such dangers as attacks by armed bands.
German police officials are also involved.
ICC arrest warrant for President Bashir
Omar al-Bashir
He is wanted for suspected crimes against humanity on five counts and war crimes on two counts.
Amongst other crimes, he is accused of deliberately attacking the civilian population and of looting.
In response to the arrest warrant, the Sudanese Government stopped the work of 13 international humanitarian non-governmental organisations.
The Janjaweed, mounted militias of Arab descent in the Darfur region, are thought responsible for numerous crimes.
Following more than two years of negotiations, a peace agreement for Darfur was signed on 14 July 2011 between the Sudanese Government and the LJM, providing for the integration of rebels into the Sudanese army, the return and compensation of refugees and the administrative reorganisation of the region.
Although the arbitration verdict on the demarcation of the border issued by the Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA) in The Hague with respect to Abyei has been acknowledged, it cannot be implemented because of the area’s continued unclarified status.
UNISFA, a United Nations peace mission, stands between two opposing tribes, the South Sudanese Ngok Dinka and the ethnically Arab Messiria.
German support for the people in the Sudan
Germany is providing important political support for the peace process and for a peaceful post-referendum order in the Sudan,
both within the framework of the UN missions in the country and through bilateral humanitarian assistance.
Bild: Woman in a refugee camp in Darfur
Given the challenges facing both the North and the South, the international community must be attentive and committed.
In South Sudan the aim must be to build up sustainable government structures and to strengthen local capacities.
Germany is prepared to continue to support the Sudan not only through its participation in the international UNAMID and UNMISS missions, but also through further multilateral and bilateral assistance.
But this requires a greater willingness also on the part of the Sudanese Government to cooperate more closely with the international community than it has done to date.
Internationally recognised human rights standards must be adhered to.
How is Germany engaged in Sudan and South Sudan?
Germany has been actively supporting the peace processes in the Sudan for years.
The main focuses of Germany’s engagement are:
Support and political consulting to ensure a secure environment and a peaceful balance between the Sudan and South Sudan, support for the peace-keeping missions in the Sudan and South Sudan, and demobilisation and reintegration programmes for former combatants.
Stabilising and building up state structures in South Sudan, as well as supporting the South Sudanese Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration programme (DDR), assisting with administrative reforms, and strengthening infrastructure.
Humanitarian help (funded by the Federal Foreign Office) as well as support for the Darfur peace process.
Supporting constitutional reforms in the Sudan and South Sudan.
Development-oriented emergency and transitional aid as well as development projects in South Sudan (funded by the Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development)
Between 2009 and 2012, Germany contributed a total of around 802 million euros.
Most of this sum went towards contributions to the two UN missions UNMIS/UNMISS (to safeguard peace in South Sudan) and UNAMID (to monitor the peace agreement and provide humanitarian assistance for Darfur).
German participation in UNAMID
With Resolution 1769, the United Nations Security Council decided to establish UNAMID, a hybrid operation in Darfur with the African Union on 31 July 2007.
Having been extended for the fifth time, its mandate lasts until 31 July 2014.
The main tasks of UNAMID involve implementing the Darfur Peace Agreements which were signed on 5 May 2006 in Abuja (Nigeria) and 14 July 2011 in Doha (Qatar).
Further tasks include protecting civilians and humanitarian workers as well as protecting its own personnel.
The mandate also comprises promoting human rights and observing the situation at the Sudanese-Chadian border.
UNAMID replaces the previous African Union mission in Darfur (AMIS).
Bild: German police officer on duty with UNAMID
The Bundeswehr's participation in UNAMID was first approved by the German Bundestag on 15 November 2007.
Most recently and at the request of the Federal Government, the German Bundestag extended the mandate on 8 November 2012.
The current mandate runs until 31 December 2013 at the latest.
According to the so-called mandate ceiling, a maximum of 50 servicemen and servicewomen may be deployed.
German participation in the UN Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) aims to support the Government in post-conflict rehabilitation and thus also in reinforcing state-building and economic development in the longer term.
Moreover, UNMISS is also helping to establish the rule of law and strengthen the security and justice sectors.
UNMISS replaces the previous mission UNMIS (with one S”), which came to an end when South Sudan declared independence.
The Bundeswehr’s participation in the UNMIS mission was first approved by the German Bundestag in April 2005.
On 9 July 2011 South Sudan became independent and a sovereign state.
The previous day, on 8 July 2011, the United Nations Security Council unanimously passed a resolution authorising the new UNMISS mission. Also on that same day the German Bundestag approved a mandate for the deployment of German armed forces under the auspices of UNMISS.
The current mandate was approved by the Bundestag on 8 November 2012.
It runs to the 31 December 2013.
The mandate ceiling is 50 servicemen and servicewomen.
Statement regarding the collation and use of personal data
Each time a user accesses the Internet content of the Federal Foreign Office or calls up a file, data on this activity is temporarily stored and processed in a log file.
Each item of data is anonymised before storage by changing the IP address.
This data is evaluated solely for statistical and quality-related purposes and is subsequently deleted.
It is not used for other purposes or transferred to third parties.
These session cookies contain no personal data and are erased at the end of the session.
Technology such as Java applets and activeX controls which allows user access behaviour to be monitored is not used.
Postal and email addresses supplied in connection with enquiries or requests for information material are used solely for correspondence and shipping respectively.
Web 2.0
Data protection information
We expressly draw your attention to the fact that Facebook permanently stores the information of its users in the United States and uses it for commercial purposes.
We are unable to identify how long and to what extent the data is stored, how the data is evaluated and linked, and to whom the data is passed on.
You can find further information on the subject of data protection on the website of the Federal Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information at http://www.bfdi.bund.de.
The Federal Foreign Office takes the current discussion on data protection in social networks very seriously and asks you to consider very carefully what personal information you supply to Facebook by using our site.
Tunisia: Foreign Minister Westerwelle shocked by attempted attacks
Foreign Minister Westerwelle issued the following statement today on the situation in Tunisia:
I am shocked by the attempted attacks carried out in Tunisia today.
If political stability is to return to Tunisia, it is vitally important that the national dialogue continues.
Pakistan Days in Germany
The Federal Foreign Office amended its travel and security advice for Tunisia today:
The focus during the Pakistan Days is on proliferating bilateral trade relations.
Travellers in the Sousse area are advised not to leave their hotels for the time being and to be vigilant.
This objective has seen the arrival from Pakistan of the largest business delegation ever to visit Germany.
More than 300 participants from Pakistan and Germany gathered at the House of German Business in Berlin on 30 October to work together on deepening German-Pakistan trade relations.
The discussions centred around the search for new markets and fresh opportunities open to investors and businesses in the two countries.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle and Chief Minister Sharif on their way to the Pakistan Days
Westerwelle, who has visited Pakistan three times, furthermore called on the Government in Islamabad to take a determined approach to the necessary reforms:
I encourage the Government of Pakistan to continue its reform policy, even if some of the necessary steps will be unpopular, like raising the tax base or restructuring public enterprises.
Westerwelle: Continue economic reform
Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle launched the event in conjunction with the Chief Minister of Punjab, Shahbaz Sharif, on 30 October. The Pakistan Days are organised by the Association of German Chambers of Commerce and Industry and the Pakistan German Business Forum.
Giving his speech in German, the Chief Minister of Punjab, Shahbaz Sharif, thanked Foreign Minister Westerwelle for being the first representative of a friendly country to visit Pakistan after the latest elections.
That sign of friendship, he said, would not be forgotten in Pakistan.
"Democracy is now firmly rooted in Pakistan."
Addressing the German participants, he spoke in favour of expanding trade relations:
Please, open your markets.
Invest in Pakistan, especially in the energy sector.
Make profits, and simultaneously help drive our economic development.
The number of German businesses active in Pakistan has been growing again for some years.
After the more moderate growth rates of recent years, Pakistan recorded strong economic growth of over 4% last year.
Opening address by Federal Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle at the Pakistan Days
The crisis unit at the Federal Foreign Office has met to look at the situation of German tourists in the country and, if necessary, to be able to provide swift assistance.
The latest travel advice can be viewed at www.diplo.de.
All political forces must now work together to find pragmatic solutions so that Tunisia can master the challenges ahead, including the fight against Islamist terrorism.
Minister Westerwelle spoke on the phone this afternoon with Tunisia’s Foreign Minister Othman Jarandi.
He assured the Minister of Germany’s solidarity and reaffirmed the German Government’s readiness to continue actively supporting the transition process in Tunisia.
The focus during the Pakistan Days in Berlin and Munich is on proliferating Germany and Pakistan’s trade relations.
In his opening address, Foreign Minister Westerwelle highlighted Pakistan’s economic potential rooted in its strategic position in South Asia, its wealth of mineral resources, its growing middle classes and the youth of its population.
The German Foreign Minister pointed out that the recent agreement between Pakistan and the International Monetary Fund had restored confidence in the country’s economic policy.
Sharif: Confidence in Pakistan’s economy and politics
Foreign Minister Westerwelle with Chief Minister Sharif, State Secretary Herkes of the Federal Economics Ministry and Stefan Dircks of the Association of German Chambers of Commerce and Industry
The Chief Minister, whose brother is Pakistan’s Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, called on people to have confidence in the country’s economy and politics:
Dismantle the obstacles.
German companies’ growing interest in Pakistan
This populous South Asian country is becoming more and more interesting to German industry.
At the same time, extensive investment is needed to develop infrastructure to keep up with the growth of the population and the economy and make full use of the country’s potential for growth.
This applies particularly to the energy sector.
As the strongest economy in Europe, Germany represents an important market for Pakistan’s businesses selling medical instruments and jewellery as well as textiles and agricultural products.
More information on Pakistan and German-Pakistan relations
An international dialogue with urban planners
At the invitation of the Federal Foreign Office, spatial and traffic planning experts from around the world visited Germany for a seminar on innovative urban development - from "smart cities" to reorienting towards a greener approach.
The programme is part of the international Visitors Programme of the Federal Government.
The "intelligent city" - architects and urban planners visit Germany
How can Germany deal with the challenges presented by structural change in the field of spatial planning?
What innovative options would enable inclusion and disability policy to be incorporated into traffic planning?
And what role can citizens play in the development of their surroundings, both at work and at home?
As part of the Visitors Programme of the Federal Government, the Federal Foreign Office has invited more than 20 experts on urban development and traffic planning as well as specialised journalists from around the world to Berlin from 27 October to 1 November.
Bild: Architects and urban planners from around the world against the backdrop of Berlin
The 22 participants come from very different regions in the world.
Be it from Egypt, Mexico or Viet Nam, it is their interest in and the growing need for innovative solutions for urban development, traffic planning and accessibility in their countries that has brought them to Berlin.
Over the course of this week they aim to learn more about how the issues of structural change and technical progress are dealt with in Germany.
Meetings with German partners to exchange views on these matters are a main priority.
On the one hand the international guests are offered the chance to gain an up-to-date and nuanced insight into Germany and forge connections to the country, whilst on the other international exchange on the relevant issues is fostered.
From call to tender to Passive house
The visit included a panel discussion on 30 October with high-ranking representatives from the Association of German Architects (BDA), German urban planning agencies and architects from Berlin, on the topic "Intelligent cities and the implications for architecture and urban development".
The German side explained particularities such as the status of an architect within the planning process.
Furthermore the current issues within the debate on urban construction were raised, such as social justice in housing construction.
Above all the growing demand for citizens to be able to become involved was addressed, with the example of the use of the former Tempelhof Airport, which gave rise to a very lively exchange of views.
The German representatives contributed experiences from China and Abu Dhabi.
By the same token a South African participant sought an exchange of experiences in the run-up to the "Cool Capital Biennale 2014" in Pretoria, which tackles urban planning from the viewpoint of the city’s inhabitants.
The programme runs until 1 November.
Until then the agenda includes more discussions on environmentally friendly housebuilding and security in large cities.
More about the Visitors Programme of the Federal Government
(Film)
The Visitors Programme of the Federal Government enables foreign multipliers to see Germany with their own eyes and thus gain an authentic, up-to-date and nuanced insight into the country.
At the invitation of the Federal Government participants usually spend a week, filled with a variety of meetings on relevant topics, in Germany.
Every year some 1000 high-ranking individuals and young potentials from abroad have the opportunity to take part in one of around 200 fact-finding tours. This is based on the conviction that prejudices can only be overcome through direct, personal contact.
The Visitors Programme
Germany supporting the OSCE in the Transdniestria peace process
At the OSCE conference on Transdniestria currently being held in Landshut, the atmosphere is relaxed.
Is this thanks to the sunny autumn weather being enjoyed in Lower Bavaria –
or has the mood improved between the representatives of the Republic of Moldova and the separatist region of Transdniestria?
What is certain, however, is that Landshut is seeing one of the rare meetings between Iurie Leanca, Prime Minister of the Republic of Moldova, and the representative of Transdniestria, Yevgeny Shevchuk.
The Ukrainian Chairperson-in-Office of the OSCE, Leonid Kozhara, and German Minister of State Michael Link, have played an important role in bringing it about.
A conversation between (left to right) Prime Minister Leanca of the Republic of Moldova, Ukrainian Foreign Minister Kozhara, Minister of State Link and Yevgeny Shevchuk representing Transdniestria
The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) is holding a conference on resolving the Transdniestria conflict in Landshut from 29 October to 1 November.
Funded by the Federal Foreign Office, this is the third conference of its kind to be held in Germany.
Gratifyingly,
all those involved have explicitly commended Germany for the financial and political support it provides.
Minister of State Link: Supporting the peace process
The negotiating parties are supported in their endeavours by the European Union and the United States, which have observer status at meetings of the 5+2 group.
Hopes of progress
The OSCE reported that Jennifer Brush, head of its mission in the Republic of Moldova, had expressed the hope that progress could be made on unresolved issues –
to the benefit of people living on both sides of the Nistru/Dniester river.
Confidential consultations
This was only the second time Prime Minister Leanca had met the representative of Transdniestria since taking office in May 2013.
Conference participants
The conference is seeing representatives of the two conflict parties discuss confidence-building measures.
The purpose of the talks is to improve conditions for people living in the Republic of Moldova and the separatist region of Transdniestria.
Time will soon tell whether the relaxed atmosphere between the negotiating parties was just down to the sunshine or perhaps signalled movement in the peace process:
the next 5+2 meeting is being planned for the end of November in Kyiv, capital of Ukraine.
No state has recognised its unilateral declaration of independence.
There have been negotiations aimed at resolving the Transdniestria conflict since 1993.
The process brings together representatives from Moldova and Transdniestria as well as the OSCE, Russia and Ukraine in the role of brokers and the EU and the US with observer status (the “5+2 format”).
More information about the Republic of Moldova and the Transdniestria conflict
According to Minister of State Link, the German side hopes that its commitment to the conference will help bring about more intensive “dialogue between high-level politicians, diplomats and experts” from the two conflict parties.
Germany, he said, was demonstrating its intention to “remain engaged in the search for a peaceful solution to the conflict”.
As the German Minister of State describes it, the meeting also serves to support the 5+2 process, which is the format in which the OSCE, Russia and Ukraine are working with representatives of the Republic of Moldova and Transdniestria to seek a solution to the conflict surrounding the separatist region east of the Nistru/Dniester river.
Ukraine’s Foreign Minister Kozhara chairing a conference session alongside Antje Leendertse, Federal Foreign Office Director for Eastern Europe.
Ukraine’s Foreign Minister Kozhara, who is the current OSCE Chairperson-in-Office, spoke early in the conference to commend the Republic of Moldova’s and Transdniestria’s readiness to choose the path of confidence-building and seek a viable solution to the conflict that both sides can accept.
He said this was also one of Ukraine’s priorities for its term holding the OSCE chairmanship.
On only the second day of the conference, the Republic of Moldova’s Prime Minister Leanca and Yevgeny Shevchuk, representative of Transdniestria, met for a confidential discussion, accompanied by the Ukrainian OSCE chair and Germany’s Minister of State Link.
Possible ways are being sought for the two sides to cooperate pragmatically in certain important areas: freedom of movement, the region’s economic prospects and protection of the environment.
The agenda there will centre around further specific advances towards solving this now 20-year-old conflict.
Transdniestria (an area east of the Nistru/Dniester river, where the majority of the population is Russian and Ukrainian) de facto broke away from Moldova proper in connection with the dissolution of the Soviet Union.
In the coming weeks Germany will work with Brazil to build a broad international alliance in support of the resolution.
It is impossible to say for sure.
The draft submitted by Germany and Brazil states that the rights people have offline must also be protected online, particularly the right to privacy.
Commenting on this, Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle said in Berlin on 30 October:
Effective protection of privacy can only be achieved on a global scale.
Specifically, the following data is stored each time content is accessed:
anonymised IP address,
accessed page/name of accessed file,
amount of data transmitted,
notification whether the process was successful.
Accessing individual pages generates so-called transient cookies to facilitate navigation.
Unfortunately we have no influence on Facebook’s collection and further use of the data.
Better protection of human rights in the digital age
Federal Foreign Minister Westerwelle meets his Brazilian colleague Machado during the UN General Assembly in New York.
To this end the initiative builds on the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the so-called UN Civil Rights Covenant.
The Federal Government believes that civil liberties and human rights must be enforced both offline and online.
Working together to improve privacy protection in the digital age
Germany believes that adoption of the resolution by the United Nations General Assembly will be an important factor in driving forward international efforts to protect privacy.
That is why we are working within the United Nations to ensure adequate protection of civil liberties and human rights in the modern age.
After German and Brazilian representatives had presented the initiative to the United Nations in New York on 1 November, the German Foreign Minister stressed once again the importance of international privacy protection in the modern age.
I am seeking a broad alliance for privacy protection among the international community.
The aim of the German-Brazilian initiative is to protect human rights in the digital age more effectively on a global scale.
In light of the publication of far-reaching surveillance allegations in the so-called eavesdropping scandal, Germany is working at an international level to promote the right of individuals to determine what information they provide and the protection of privacy.
On 1 November Germany and Brazil presented a joint draft resolution to the United Nations in New York calling for more effective protection of privacy.
On 1 November Germany and Brazil presented a joint draft resolution to the Human Rights Committee of the United Nations General Assembly in New York calling for more effective protection of privacy.
German diplomats in New York are prepared to conduct intensive negotiations on the issue with the other 191 UN member states.
The draft resolution calls upon all states to scrutinise the legislation they have in place for monitoring communications and collecting personal data, as well as its practical application, and specifically to guarantee the right to privacy.
“Today, digital communication is a global concern, and that is why privacy protection must also be established on a global scale.”
In view of the huge technological advances that have been made, implementation of the right to privacy guaranteed in Article 17 of the UN Civil Rights Covenant should also be enforced with regard to digital communications.
The aim is for the United Nations General Assembly to adopt the resolution and thereby help ensure adequate protection of human rights in accordance with the demands of today’s digitised world.
This is also an important aspect of the Federal Government’s eight-point plan to improve privacy protection.
Federal Foreign Minister Westerwelle on the UN Resolution “The Right to Privacy in the Digital Age”
Germany assists with destruction of chemical weapons
Today, Monday, 4 November 2013, a training course for Iraqi experts has begun in the Bundeswehr Research Institute for Protective Technologies and NBC Protection (WIS) in Munster, Lower Saxony. The experts will be trained in how to use German technology to destroy the remaining chemical weapons stockpiles left over from Saddam Hussein’s regime.
Before the end of the year the Federal Government will provide Iraq with a mobile laboratory equipped with state-of-the-art detection and measuring devices for the analysis of chemical warfare agents, to be used at the remaining chemical weapons sites in Iraq.
In this way the Federal Government is making an essential contribution to the first phase of the safe and environmentally responsible disposal of chemical weapons in Iraq.
The overall value of the support package amounts to a million euros.
This will enable Iraq to analyse the highly toxic legacy of the Saddam regime and to draft a technical strategy for its safe and environmentally responsible destruction.
In this task, the country will work in cooperation with the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW).
Germany is the third-largest contributor and a long-standing member of the Executive Council of the organisation, which was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in December for its engagement around the world.
For many years, grenades filled with the nerve gas sarin have been stored in the bunkers of a former chemical weapons production plant in Iraq.
The site also contains several hundred tonnes of chemical precursors for the production of chemical weapons.
The exact composition and condition of the warfare agents are unknown.
The Federal Government had agreed to assist Iraq with the destruction of its old chemical weapons stockpiles following the country’s accession to the international Chemical Weapons Convention in 2009.
A training course for Iraqi chemical weapons experts will begin on 4 November in Munster, Lower Saxony.
They are to be trained in how to use German technology to destroy leftover chemical weapons stockpiles.
Before the end of the year the Federal Government will make available to Iraq a mobile laboratory equipped with state-of-the-art detection and measuring devices for the analysis of chemical warfare agents.
Harald Leibrecht, Coordinator of Transatlantic Cooperation at the Federal Foreign Office, on the state of German-American relations.
The summoning of the US ambassador by the Federal Foreign Minister is also a clear sign that we no longer intend to beat about the bush.
Are you afraid the Americans might be eavesdropping on you as well?
I am neither the Chancellor nor the Foreign Minister.
What does the new situation mean for the German-American relationship?
America remains our most important ally outside the European Union.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle to speak at Latin America Day in Hamburg
Foreign Minister Westerwelle is to speak at the 64th Latin America Day in Hamburg on Tuesday, 5 November.
Nonetheless, this affair overshadows our talks both on the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership and on other agreements concerning data transfer.
How would you define friendship?
The discussions will examine what advantages the new alliance holds for trade and investment and how German companies can benefit from that development and from the Pacific Alliance.
If you can trust one another implicitly, that is friendship.
A friend will always treat information confidentially.
Is the United States still the friend it used to be?
The United States is our friend.
There is no longer anything we can take for granted about the German-American friendship.
Now the main thing for us all to do is to speak plainly with one another.
How does Germany benefit from a good relationship with the United States?
We share many common values and have much to thank the United States for.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle will hold bilateral talks with his Colombian and Chilean counterparts on the fringes of the conference.
It is a close ally in foreign policy and security issues.
It is an extremely important trade partner.
Their conversations will centre around further intensifying economic exchange and political cooperation, particularly within the United Nations.
In summer you could have gained this impression.
Are you grateful to the former United States intelligence contractor Edward Snowden for the fact that we are now better informed of US practices?
We now see many things in a different light.
Does Snowden deserve to be given asylum in Germany?
Any political fugitive can apply for asylum in Germany.
I presume that the Federal Government will continue to follow the case.
But to say any more would be mere speculation.
Karsten Kammholz.
Published in Die Welt on 26 October 2013.
We were under the impression that relations with the United States had improved again.
Have you discussed the alleged monitoring of Angela Merkel’s mobile phone with the American side?
I visited the United States again recently and had talks with many people which also focused on the NSA surveillance issues.
In the light of the eavesdropping affair I’m not exactly over the moon about it.
We want to be able to be sure that our friends aren’t spying on us.
That is why these issues must be swiftly resolved and the United States Government must restore our confidence.
A true friend doesn’t go behind your back.
A firm foundation of trust with the United States is crucial to our cooperation.
Now the basis of our friendship has been shaken.
In the international arena we present a strong united front.
Will the talks with the United States on the agreement now be held within an altered framework?
Now we will be stepping very carefully in negotiations on the release of data.
But I would advise against letting this issue jeopardise the negotiations entirely.
Run by the Lateinamerika Verein e.V. and the Hamburg Chamber of Commerce, this year’s conference is focused on the Pacific Alliance, as a newly founded economic area linking Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru.
Colombia’s Foreign Minister María Ángela Holguín Cuéllar, Chilean Foreign Minister Alfredo Moreno Charme and Mexico’s Economics Minister Ildefonso Guajardo Villarreal will all be in Hamburg for Latin America Day.
Would we be wrong in thinking that the Americans are not unduly bothered about the outcry in Europe with regard to the surveillance?
Since then the number of people in the United States who are critical of their government’s behaviour has been growing.
The policy has received particularly harsh criticism from the universities.
I expect the United States Government to reassess the incidents.
The damage is out of all proportion to the benefits.
Reproduced by kind permission of Die Welt.
Mr Leibrecht, how much do you enjoy your work these days?
It is hurtful.
Now our trust has been shaken.
I now intend to seize every opportunity to say to the Americans in no uncertain terms that these incidents are unacceptable.
Yet at the moment we are not sure how important Europe and Germany are to America.
So we can no longer speak of an unconditional friendship.
That is why we want to continue to negotiate on the free-trade agreement, which is in our own interests.
I can’t judge the extent to which that has to do with Mr Snowden.
Mr Snowden has decided to stay in Russia for the time being.
British Ambassador asked to come for a meeting at Federal Foreign Office
At the instigation of Foreign Minister Westerwelle, the British Ambassador was asked to come for a meeting at the Federal Foreign Office.
The Director-General for European Affairs asked for an explanation of current reports in British media and indicated that tapping communications from a diplomatic mission would constitute a violation of international law.
Our colleague Rüdiger von Fritsch, now Ambassador in Warsaw, helped to organise that trip.
Early commentary on Deutsche Welle:
Prime Minister Mazowiecki and Chancellor Kohl at the airport
News from the GDR
What does this mean for Germany?
Surprise turned to uncertainty in the course of the evening.
whether the Chancellor had to return to Germany.
Firstly, that he had to return
How will the Chancellor get to Berlin?
Rüdiger von Fritsch asked himself many questions:
The blue diary with memories of Warsaw
What difference did it make that the Chancellor heard about the fall of the Wall in Warsaw, not in Bonn?
Yet even today there is a great lack of awareness when it comes to Jewish citizens in our society.
What I think is very important is that we don’t only talk about the past, but rather that we also hold German-Israeli intergovernmental consultations, comprising broad-ranging cooperation with many elements of the Israeli Government, and thereby also strengthen our relations.
So Germany has many contacts on both sides, and uses them in order to encourage everyone to head down the difficult, but in my view, still favourable, path of a peace process.
The questions were asked by Samuel Vingron, 17, secondary school pupil at the Jewish Moses Mendelssohn school in Berlin.
Samuel Vingron:
To begin with it marks the darkest chapter in our history.
It was really a an absolute lowpoint of German history.
Unfortunately with the Shoah and the utter betrayal of all civilised values which ensued, history took an even more dramatic turn.
With the Night of Broken Glass it is quite different.
The generation that was alive then and of which some people have served as eye witnesses has since nearly died out.
What programmes is the Federal Government planning to ensure that the memory of National Socialism still remains present?
Luckily we still have eye witnesses, and I have been able to meet many of them personally.
First of all I would like to thank them very much.
Secondly we must of course prepare for the time when we will no longer have eye witnesses, and this is why we have a strong culture of remembrance.
places such as the Memorial to the Murdered Jews of Europe, the Topography of Terror or even
the Jewish Museum.
The Jewish Museum is a place where the real pain of the destruction of Jewish life in Germany can be felt.
And then there are different actions, spread right across the country, one which I think is very good is the project of small brass plaques.
And this means that you continually pass a street or specific place and are forced to remember, I think that is very important.
And then the Federal Government, and also the Länder, run many programmes against extremism and against anti-Semitism.
And moreover we need all people in the country to have courage in their convictions, to not tolerate anti-Semitism.
For instance, according to a study commissioned by the German Bundestag in March 2013, one in five Germans harbours latent anti-Semitic sentiment.
Nonetheless most Jews of my generation feel safe in Germany.
What can the German State, what can politicians do, to ensure this remains the case?
First of all it is very good that nowadays there is once again a vibrant Jewish scene in Germany.
The Federal Government supports this Jewish life.
Here excellent work to foster integration takes place, for which I must express my gratitude.
it is depressing and nearly inexplicable yet nonetheless reality, that no Jewish installation can be without police protection, that police officers must be constantly present and stand guard in front of kindergartens, in front of schools, in front of all institutions.
Therefore we must repeatedly discuss the issue, state that there is no place for anti-Semitic tendencies here, but we have yet to reach this goal.
Nowadays, modern anti-Semitism also manifests itself as criticism of Israel.
What starts out as an acceptable and sometimes even understandable opinion often proves to be pure anti-Semitism.
What is your assessment of growing anti-Zionism in Germany and what could the State and society do to counter it?
I think that we have to speak very openly with people in Germany about this.
It is legitimate to voice criticism, including of Israel’s policies.
Nevertheless responsibility for Israel’s security is part of Germany’s national ethos.
We want an Israeli State that can live in peace with its neighbours.
Therefore we advocate
a two-state solution and also hope that progress will be achieved in these peace talks.
One issue on which I personally stake great hopes is that active peace talks between Israel and the Palestinian Government have been relaunched.
How can the German State support the peace process in the Middle East?
We are encouraging the two sides to approach each other and both to be prepared to make compromises.
I have held many talks on this matter with the Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu, just as I have with the Palestinian President Abbas.
We support the intensive efforts of America, of Secretary of State Kerry, to move these peace talks forward and as always, Germany stands ready to step in whenever it is desired or required.
And of course we have very close relations with Israel.
Rüdiger von Fritsch heard in the delegation office at the government guest house that the GDR authorities were allowing citizens to cross the border.
“The preparations began that night.
Gulf Cooperation Council
The GCC seeks to foster peace and security in the region, as well as economic integration among member states.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle and the Secretary General of the Gulf Cooperation Council, Abdul Al Zayani, in Berlin on 2 February 2012
The organisation is based in Riyadh.
Abdullatif bin Rashid al Zayani from Bahrain has been the Secretary-General since 1 April 2011.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle meets him regularly (most recently on the fringes of the UN General Assembly in New York in September 2012).
The GCC’s most important decision-making body is the Supreme Council, composed of Heads of State and Government, which convenes once a year. It last met in Manama in December 2012.
The GCC Presidency rotates annually (2013: Bahrain).
A free-trade zone was launched in 1983, the GCC Customs Union in 2003 and the GCC Common Market in 2008.
With the exception of the free flow of capital and free right of establishment, the Customs Union and Common Market have not yet been put into practice.
It will also take a few years before the plans to introduce a single currency are implemented.
Oman and the UAE plan to remain observers for the foreseeable future.
The GCC Monetary Council has been based in Riyadh since 2009.
The member states have entered into a mutual defence pact
and the Peninsula Shield Force were set up in 1984 as a joint defence force.
Declaring that the Gulf region was facing an external threat, the GCC states sent military units to Bahrain in March 2011.
These countries account for around two thirds of the oil produced in the entire Middle East and North Africa region.
Their share of the world’s oil reserves is 55%, and their share of global oil production is around one fifth.
Saudi Arabia, mainly due to its size, has by far the largest economy in the Gulf Cooperation Council.
The richest country in terms of per-capita GDP is Qatar.
In foreign policy terms, it has become an important voice in the Arab world.
Member states have shown, and indeed continue to show, their readiness to take action in the crises in Yemen, Libya and Syria.
Since then, Bahrain, Kuwait, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates have been taking part in consultations and training courses.
EU relations with the Gulf Cooperation Council
Conversely, the EU is the GCC’s number one trading partner.
In 1988, the two organisations concluded a cooperation agreement which has been in force since 1990.
It provides the framework for a comprehensive expansion of economic relations.
Working groups were set up for the spheres of economic cooperation, energy and the environment.
The most important project aimed at intensifying contacts is a free trade agreement between the EU and the GCC.
The negotiations began in 1990 but were suspended between 1991 and 2001.
Once a year, the EU and GCC Foreign Ministers meet, with the venue alternating between the EU and the country holding the GCC Presidency (the most recent meeting was in Manama in June 2013).
Although agreement has now been reached on most contentious issues, no progress has been made since 2009.
As well as relations in the economics sphere, the EU is seeking to expand cooperation in areas such as energy security, environmental protection, culture and education, human rights and the fight against terrorism.
He decided to write down his experiences in a blue notebook and now has a detailed description of events surrounding “the first visit by a German Head of Government to a formerly socialist country, which at this point already had a largely free government.”
Common values shared with Latin America
The Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) – whose member states are the Kingdom of Bahrain, Kuwait, the Sultanate of Oman, Qatar, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates – was founded in Abu Dhabi in 1981.
Even setting aside the events in Berlin that evening, which no-one was expecting that morning, this would not have been an easy visit in light of the difficult nature of German-Polish history.
The Pacific Alliance was a prominent theme at the 64th Latin America Day.
In the company of his Chilean and Colombian counterparts, Foreign Minister Westerwelle highlighted the common values shared by all sides.
Bild: (left to right) Ministers Westerwelle, Holguín, Villarreal and Moreno
“The day has finally arrived:
The route has been planned, the communiqués written, and now the Chancellor can travel to Poland ...”
If only they had known!
The Ambassador tried desperately and in vain to contact the Foreign Minister.
On the margins of the conference, the Minister also held bilateral talks with his Chilean and Colombian counterparts.
Germany enjoys a history of good relations with both countries.
Not only the schedule for the visit was still in flux:
The planned joint declaration by Kohl and Mazowiecki, which had been negotiated for months, had still not been finalised.
Already the 64th Latin America Day to be held in Germany, the event drew a number of high-level participants.
Not even the weather was favourable on this historic day.
Due to heavy fog, the departure had to be postponed again, states Rüdiger von Fritsch.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle was joined at the opening by his opposite numbers from Chile and Colombia, Alfredo Moreno and María Ángela Holguín.
Delayed arrival in Warsaw.
After the customary welcome on the landing field with military honours, the programme got off as planned and the first official meetings took place.
Secretary of Economy Ildefonso Guajardo Villarreal was there representing Mexico.
Minister Westerwelle at the Latin America Day
He went on as follows:
That was very evident.
There was still a large number of refugees in the Embassy at that time.”
This, he said, was not merely political theory but foreign policy as practised.
As an example, he cited the German-Brazilian initiative to protect privacy in a digital age launched at the UN a few days previously.
German support for the Pacific Alliance
Von Fritsch says that this news dominated the subsequent talks between Genscher and the publicist Adam Michnik, one of the leading minds of the former democratic opposition.
It was an impressive conversation.”
“What does this mean for Europe?
“The news was a bombshell.
All three spoke in praise of what they called the excellent state of bilateral relations between Germany and its Latin American partners.
The diplomat remembers that the analysis of the Polish opposition at this time was already very clear.
“It was:
These countries’ economic strength is increasingly being transformed into political clout.
However, bilateral agreements – especially with the US – remain key to member states’ security.
The GCC states cover an area of just under 2.5 million km2 and have around 44 million inhabitants.
In 2004, NATO decided to develop a security partnership with Middle East countries, initially with GCC member states (Istanbul Cooperation Initiative, ICI).
The GCC accounts for around one half of the European Union’s entire trade with Arab states (EU-GCC trade volume in 2012: 144.6 billion euros).
An agreement with the EU would be the GCC’s first free-trade agreement with another economic community.
That was compelling logic!”
“It quickly got very hectic.
We as members of Protocol noticed this because there were soon discussions on
A decision was made relatively quickly.
and secondly that he would come back. The Polish side would then show understanding.”
Germany applied to the members of the Alliance for observer status in September of this year.
Westerwelle and Moreno in Hamburg
The departure time was brought forward.
That was important to us because I was responsible for logistics.”
The newly founded Pacific Alliance was also discussed during the political talks.
An extract from the diary:
Chile, for example, will have a non-permanent seat in that high-level organ in 2014 and 2015.
The German Government has already pledged its support.
Foreign Minister Holguín also informed her German counterpart about domestic developments in Colombia.
Founded in 2012, the Pacific Alliance economic area links Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru.
After some negotiation, the Polish side was prepared to let the plane take off from its parking position.
The partners are bound to one another by a network of reciprocal free-trade agreements.
“Reaching Berlin was a problem.
Only the Allies had the right to land there.”
Finally, the ministers were able to leave and the journalists also headed back to Germany.
The Chancellor appeared punctually on the evening of 10 November at a mass gathering in front of Schöneberg town hall.
The next day he arrived back in Poland where he continued his visit, among other things with a mass of reconciliation at the former residence of Helmuth James Graf von Moltke, a member of the German resistance:
“That was highly symbolic.
Kohl and Mazowiecki embraced in Krzyzowa.”
A fortunate turn of events?
Rüdiger von Fritsch believes that this twist of fate had many positive aspects:
He goes on to say that Helmut Kohl had been able to stress that the Polish people had not only suffered at the hands of Germany but that it had also helped ensure that Germany had developed positively.
“I see that in retrospect today as Ambassador.
When the Wall fell on 9 November, Chancellor Kohl and Foreign Minister Genscher had just arrived with a large delegation in Poland.
Chancellor Kohl decided to interrupt but not end the trip on 10 November to visit Berlin.
He returned to Warsaw the very next day.
You can find more information on German-Polish relations on the website of our Embassy in Warsaw
In the Lima Declaration of 28 April 2011, the founding members agree to incrementally introduce free movement of goods, capital, services and people in order to make the area more attractive to investment.
Further information is available on our country-specific pages on Chile, Colombia and Mexico.
At this year’s Latin America Day in Hamburg, the Pacific Alliance was very much a prominent theme.
In his speech, Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle made it clear that Germany’s relations with the continent were founded in shared values.
The German Foreign Minister used his opening address to make it clear that Germany’s partnership with Latin America was founded in shared values.
“We are bound together by the same ideas of freedom, human dignity, democracy and the rule of law.
The full text of Foreign Minister Westerwelle’s speech is available here.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle and Colombia’s Foreign Minister Holguín
On the margins of the conference, Foreign Minister Westerwelle held further bilateral talks with his Colombian opposite number, Foreign Minister Holguín, and with Chile’s Foreign Minister Moreno.
Both Colombia’s Foreign Minister, who currently chairs the Alliance, and her Chilean opposite number welcomed Germany’s interest in the Latin American organisation.
The bilateral talks furthermore looked at the countries’ collaboration with one another on the United Nations Security Council.
The Alliance’s primary objective is free trade rather than political integration.
More information about Latin America Day on the Lateinamerika Verain’s website
At the same time, it is in intense global competition as a high-tech country with many industrialised countries, new global players and emerging economies.
To secure its prosperity, Germany continuously develops its capacity for innovation and weaves networks of international ties.
A shared platform for Germany as a research hub
The members of the Alliance of Scientific Organizations in Germany are involved here in a variety of different constellations.
Speech by Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle at the opening of the German Science Centre in Cairo, 13 November 2012
Fall of the Berlin Wall during an official visit to Warsaw
When the Berlin Wall fell on 9 November 1989, Federal Chancellor Kohl and Foreign Minister Genscher were out of the country.
Only hours before, they had set off on a five-day official visit to Poland.
“Fortunately, I did something which I don’t normally do, namely kept a diary”, comments Rüdiger von Fritsch on the turbulent situation in autumn 1989, which he witnessed in Warsaw.
Von Fritsch goes on to say that this new political situation in Poland made the visit unique and the size of the delegation was a challenge.
“Most of the Federal Cabinet was there, 100 guests of honour, 300 journalists ... the delegation was huge. What’s more, the trip took place under difficult logistic circumstances – you couldn’t phone from one side of the Weichsel to the other when it was raining.”
A difficult official visit
Looking back, von Fritsch says with conviction that “This was the craziest and most chaotic, most intensive and most interesting visit I’ve ever helped organise in the course of my career”.
On 9 November 1989, he wrote in his diary:
The Chancellor had let it be known that he would not leave Bonn until it had been completed.
“Of course, the events taking place in the various socialist countries – not least in the GDR – played a prominent role in all talks.
The first reports concerning events in East Berlin reached Warsaw before the banquet.
We didn’t notice until the night that it meant the Wall would fall.”
‘If we’re a free country, then we want a country which looks to Europe.
The GDR is in our way and therefore we Poles should work towards Germany’s reunification.
Then united Germany will recognise its eastern border once and for all and help us become part of Europe.’
Should the Chancellor stay or leave?
How could he fulfil his obligations both at home and in his host country?
Kohl assured the Polish Prime Minister Mazowiecki that he would return – and he kept his word.
About 8 o’clock the next morning I learned that the delegation was travelling back that same afternoon.
“How will the crew get to the airport and where are they at the moment?
Two crew members had been assigned to the wreath-laying ceremony at the monument, but they actually had to get to the airport ...!”
The captain doesn’t know yet that the departure has been brought forward.
“2 p.m. at the earliest if everything goes well.” But that means there won’t be any meals on board.
But that doesn’t matter. We just have to get away.
That saved 20 minutes.
What is more, a detour had to be made via Hamburg, for
A sponsored coach trip through Warsaw was quickly arranged for the guests of honour staying behind.
Poland’s Prime Minister Mazowiecki at the banquet on 9 November 1989 with his guests Kohl (left) and Genscher.
“The fact that he wasn’t in the country and seized this opportunity to subsequently thank the Poles was, I would say, a fortunate turn of events.”
The foundation for today’s good relations was laid at that time.”
Part 2 of our series “In the line of duty” – Fall of the Berlin Wall during an official visit to Warsaw:
The five-day official visit had been planned as a historic trip to improve relations with Poland.
German Science Centre, Cairo
Overcoming Borders, Boundless Research – Minister of State Pieper on research and academic relations policy
This raises Germany's profile as a centre for innovation, creates synergies and forges links between German and non-German drivers of innovation.
Promoting Germany as a centre for science, technology and innovation
Collaborating with innovative German organisations and companies
Promoting dialogue and exchange; consolidating scientific and technological cooperation
Advising and supporting German and non-German research institutions and companies
Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle and Margret Wintermantel, President of the German Academic Exchange Service, opening the German Science Centre in Cairo
In conjunction with German and non-German partners engaged in research in science and industry, for example, they run joint events, workshops, trips, online collaboration platforms and much more besides.
German Houses of Research and Innovation
In one example of these activities, the Federal Foreign Office supports German Houses of Research and Innovation around the world, as part of its research and academic relations policy and the strategy of the Federal Government for the Internationalization of Science and Research.
German Houses of Research and Innovation have opened in five different locations, aided by close collaboration with the Federal Ministry of Education and Research, the Alliance of Scientific Organizations in Germany and the Association of German Chambers of Commerce and Industry.
Alongside the German Science Centre in Cairo, these Houses in New York, São Paulo, New Delhi, Tokyo and Moscow provide a platform for all the German science and research organisations, universities and companies with a presence abroad to come together under one roof.
The German Houses of Research and Innovation’s main tasks are as follows:
The German Houses of Research and Innovation have adapted their approaches according to their various locations.
Speech by State Secretary Emily Haber at the opening of the German House for Research and Innovation in New Delhi on 27 October 2012
Speech by Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle at the opening of the German House of Science and Innovation in São Paulo on 14 February 2012
Joint website of the German Houses of Research and Innovation
German Center for Research and Innovation, New York
German House of Science and Innovation, São Paulo
German House of Research and Innovation, New Delhi
German Research and Innovation Forum, Tokyo
The internet pages of the German Houses of Research and Innovation can be accessed via the links below:
German House for Research and Innovation, Moscow
Speech by Foreign Minister Westerwelle at the Art and Exhibition Hall of the Federal Republic of Germany in Bonn
Foreign Minister Westerwelle spoke in commemoration of the First World War at the opening of the exhibitions “1914 – The Avant-Gardes at War” and “Missing Sons” at the Art and Exhibition Hall of the Federal Republic of Germany in Bonn on 7 November 2013.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle speaking at the Art and Exhibition Hall
Iran: Crucial and difficult stage in the negotiations
Foreign Minister Westerwelle is travelling at short notice to Geneva to take part in the ongoing negotiations with Iran,
which have now reached a crucial but difficult stage.
Iran: Crucial and difficult stage reached in the negotiations
Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle is travelling at short notice to Geneva to take part in the ongoing negotiations with Iran.
Federal Foreign Office Spokesperson Martin Schäfer commented that a crucial but difficult stage in the negotiations had been reached.
The Foreign Ministers of France, the UK and the US are also expected to travel to Geneva shortly.
The negotiations are being chaired by EU High Representative Ashton.
For a diplomatic solution
Following the last round of the Geneva negotiations on 16 October, Foreign Minister Westerwelle commented:
This was a successful start to serious, substantive talks.
We want to continue these quickly.”
There have been major doubts and questions about the nature of the Iranian nuclear programme since 2002.
Germany is calling for a political solution in the dispute surrounding the nuclear programme.
The round of negotiations which began yesterday between the E3+3 and Iran and which is being chaired by EU High Representative Catherine Ashton has reached a crucial but difficult stage.
and that these were important and serious negotiations.
Three European states - the UK, France and Germany - as well as the US, Russia and China (known collectively as the E3+3) are negotiating with Iran.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle is due to travel to Geneva on Friday to take part in the ongoing negotiations on Iran’s nuclear programme.
He went on to say that the task now was to try and reach initial agreement on issues relating to Iran’s nuclear programme.
Catherine Ashton’s spokesperson tweeted that contacts were ongoing at all levels
“The talks in Geneva strengthen our hope that a diplomatic solution which completely removes our concerns about the nature of Iran’s nuclear programme is possible.
More information on the negotiations concerning Iran’s nuclear programme can be found here.
An exhibition organised by the Centrum Judaicum in Berlin in cooperation with the Federal Foreign Office.
Foreign policy that recognises historical responsibility
The German Government recognises Germany’s historical responsibility for the Holocaust,
which forms the basis of a special relationship with and duty towards the State of Israel and Jews all over the world.
We must keep the memory of the Holocaust alive and have it always in mind as we shape the future.
Bild: The New Synagogue in Berlin
The German Government works to promote Jewish life in Germany and beyond.
In recent decades, Germany has seen a gratifying renaissance of Jewish life.
The Israeli daily Ha’aretz has identified Germany’s Jewish communities as the most dynamic in the world.
There are also more and more young Jewish men and women coming to Germany from Israel, the US and other parts of the globe – to visit as tourists, to study or to live and work here.
Maintaining close contacts with Jewish organisations throughout the world is an important part of German foreign policy.
Germany conducts its foreign policy in full awareness of its historical responsibility,
The special nature of German-Israeli relations has found expression since 2008 in the two countries’ regular intergovernmental consultations.
The first of these to be held in Germany took place in 2010, and 2013 saw the two Governments meet in Berlin once again.
Bild: The fourth German-Israeli intergovernmental consultations in Berlin
The multiplicity of close German-Israeli relations does not stop there.
In science, research and technology, cooperation is wide-ranging.
There are close contacts in place linking the rich cultural scenes of Germany and Israel,
and large numbers of towns, communities and educational establishments are connected by exchange programmes and partnerships.
An outline of German-Israeli exchange is available here.
More on German-Israeli relations
Relations with Jewish organisations
The Federal Foreign Office underscored the importance of its relations with Jewish organisations by creating the position of a Special Representative in 2006.
First of all, she is the contact point for Jewish organisations, especially those active in the foreign policy sphere.
Thirdly, she promotes measures to combat anti-Semitism everywhere.
Particular emphasis is placed on working with the younger generation.
Jewish organisations are engaged in committed work worldwide, both directly and as intermediaries.
This makes them crucial contacts and project partners for German foreign policy concerns.
There is intensive exchange in many areas:
the preservation of cultural heritage and the culture of remembrance, human rights, youth exchange, the Middle East peace process, the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the process of transition in the Arab world are just some of them.
Close contact to Jewish-American associations
Especially Jewish-American organisations’ interest in Germany has increased appreciably in recent years.
There are a large number of contacts in place at the highest levels.
The dialogue between Germany and America’s Jewish population also has significance at the transatlantic level.
It is a forward-looking dialogue which not only involves organisations and governmental as well as parliamentary representatives; it also encompasses numerous German and American private individuals.
Their interest in Germany, particularly in the Germany of today, makes them vital bridge-builders in transatlantic relations.
Youth exchange programmes
Young Jews from Israel, the US and other countries are also showing greater interest in Germany.
Bild: Visiting the Federal Foreign Office
More than 1000 American Jews - students and young professionals - have visited Germany under the auspices of Germany Close Up - American Jews Meet Modern Germany since the programme was established in 2007.
It is estimated that more than 90% of them had never previously been to Germany.
Some of them are the first members of their families to have travelled to Germany since the Second World War.
The two-week stay provides many of the young visitors with a very intense and largely positive experience of today’s Germany.
Regular alumni meetings are held in collaboration with the German missions in the United States.
Germany Close Up is run on European Recovery Program funds as part of the German Government’s transatlantic activities.
More on Germany Close Up - American Jews meet Modern Germany
The fourth alumni meeting in New York, December 2012
Safeguarding Holocaust remembrance
Germany considers it particularly important to preserve knowledge and memories of the Holocaust, and pass the lessons learned on to future generations.
That is why Germany is supporting the Auschwitz-Birkenau Foundation, which is trying to raise capital assets to fund the long-term upkeep of the memorial to the former death camp at Auschwitz, Poland.
Having pledged to provide 60 million euros, Germany is the largest contributor to the target amount of 120 million euros.
The money is being paid in annual instalments between 2011 and 2015, half of it coming from the federal budget and half from the Länder.
Bild: The Holocaust Memorial in Berlin
Germany is second only to Israel in the range of Holocaust education programmes it runs.
Part of that work is focused on the question of how education can help prevent genocide.
The funding to set up the Foundation came in part from Germany’s federal budget, and it promotes projects run to help the victims of Nazism.
Minister of State Pieper opens exhibition on diplomats’ reports about 1938 November pogroms
Another of its core concerns is to ensure that Europe remembers the history of forced labour under the Nazis and to communicate victims’ experiences to a wider public.
Minister of State Cornelia Pieper is opening the exhibition entitled “From the Inside to the Outside – The 1938 November Pogroms in Diplomatic Reports from Germany” on Monday, 11 November.
Bild: From right to left: Sam Widawsky (survivor), Allan Jacobs (President of B’nai B’rith International), David Widawsky (second generation), Leora Klein (third generation) and Consul-General Busso von Alvensleben in New York
International Holocaust Day is marked on 27 January, the anniversary of the 1945 liberation of the Auschwitz death camp; acts of remembrance are conducted around the world.
This is the first joint exhibition by the Federal Foreign Office and the Centrum Judaicum showing foreign diplomats’ reports on the anti-Jewish pogroms of November 1938.
Germany also provides funding for numerous Holocaust remembrance projects.
The Federal Foreign Office, for example, is providing a total of 2.5 million euros between 2009 and 2013 for the New Acquisitions Preservation Project to catalogue historical material at the Leo Baeck Institute in New York.
It is also sponsoring a project to save important documentary testaments to German-speaking Jewish culture in Israel.
Various Jewish authors, academics and intellectuals from Germany who were forced into exile during the Nazi period found a new home in Israel.
Many of them managed to take their German-language libraries, collections and manuscripts with them to their new homeland and gradually built up new collections there.
A joint pilot project organized by the German Literature Archive in Marbach and the Rosenzweig Minerva Research Centre at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem is to take the first steps to save these important documents.
The exhibition shows how diplomats perceived the terrible incidents on the streets, the suffering of the victims and the response of the population and reported on them to the capital cities of their home countries.
The first phase of the project was launched on 1 October 2012. The Federal Foreign Office is providing 100,000 euros.
Projects for Central and Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union
Central and Eastern Europe and the states of the former Soviet Union are among the places where Germany provides assistance for Holocaust remembrance projects. In Warsaw, for instance, German support helped design the Museum of the History of Polish Jews.
In 2012, the Federal Foreign Office sponsored an exhibition on the Lodz/Litzmannstadt Ghetto by the Berlin memorial foundation Topography of Terror, held in the UN headquarters in New York.
More information on the exhibition
There is a pilot project underway which will run for several years supporting an initiative to preserve five sites of mass shootings in Ukraine. The long-term goal is to have the responsibility for the projects pass to the local communities.
Academic advisers to the exhibition are Dr Hermann Simon (Centrum Judaicum), Prof. Michael Wildt (HU Berlin), Dr Christian Dirks (BergZwo) and Dr Martin Kröger (Federal Foreign Office).
Another project is being run in collaboration with Yahad-In Unum to help gather eye-witness accounts of the Holocaust in several states of the former Soviet Union.
Support for Yad Vashem
Bild: Federal President Gauck and Israel's President Peres in Yad Vashem
The Yad Vashem Holocaust Memorial in Jerusalem plays a key role in efforts to ensure that the Holocaust is remembered and documented.
The German Government has been supporting the Memorial’s work for a number of years.
During a visit to the country in February 2012, Foreign Minister Westerwelle signed an Agreement with the Israeli Government
which provides for Yad Vashem to receive financial support of 10 million euros for the 2012-2021 period.
The funds are to go towards its educational and archive services.
The latter arm of Yad Vashem’s work covers such tasks as compiling documents on the Holocaust in the former Soviet Union, Central and Eastern Europe, Germany and other parts of Europe.
The documents are to be made available online to be accessed from around the world.
German-Israeli Agreement on funding for Yad Vashem, 1February 2012 (PDF, 5 MB)
Yad Vashem
Compensation for injustices suffered under the Nazis
Another important subject in German-Jewish relations is compensation for injustices suffered under the Nazi regime.
The German Government has always attached special priority to the process of providing moral and financial compensation.
In 1952, for example, Germany signed the Luxembourg Agreement, pledging to legislate for the restitutions of assets and compensation for victims of the Holocaust.
This atonement remains a key task for Germany even today.
The 60th anniversary of the Luxembourg Agreement was marked on 15 November 2012.
For more on compensation click here.
Combating anti-Semitism around the world
In the light of its history, Germany feels a special obligation to counter all anti-Semitic tendencies.
The fight against anti-Semitism is therefore not only being waged on the domestic front but also has a place at the international level.
An essential element in effectively combating anti-Semitism is providing support in the early stages to social and political forces committed to social cohesion.
The Federal Foreign Office therefore also sponsors projects in other countries which pursue that goal.
Germany is particularly active in that respect within the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE).
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE)
An article for kids about the Day of Remembrance for the Victims of National Socialism
An article for younger readers about the Day of Remembrance for the Victims of National Socialism
Foreign Minister Westerwelle on the E3+3 negotiations with Iran in Geneva
Foreign Minister Westerwelle issued the following statement in Geneva on 10 November:
We have two days of very intensive negotiations on the Iranian nuclear programme behind us in which we have managed to achieve significant progress.
Nonetheless there are still some questions which have yet to be resolved.
We have thus decided that the High Representative and the Political Directors will resume the talks with Iran in the near future.
Our goal remains a comprehensive solution which prevents the nuclear armament of Iran.
From the Inside to the Outside
The November 1938 pogroms in diplomatic reports from Germany.
Most of them are hitherto unknown reports which the Federal Foreign Office and German Embassies around the world have collected, in collaboration with the archives of those countries which maintained diplomatic missions in Germany in 1938.
which is of fundamental importance to relations between Germany and Israel.
Secondly, she works with foreign organisations on issues relating to Holocaust remembrance.
This is in part explained by the recognition being accorded to Germany for its close relations with Israel and its sense of responsibility with respect to the Holocaust and the Nazi regime.
They come to Germany, whether privately or through exchange programmes, to gain first-hand impressions not only of how Germany relates to the Shoah but also of what Germany is like in the here and now and what form Jewish life takes in Germany today.
The Federal Foreign Office is also involved in the work of various other international bodies.
In 2012, for example, the German mission in New York and the Jewish organisation B'nai B'rith International organised a joint event which included contributions from survivors of the Shoah as well as second and third generation relatives.
As this first generation of immigrants passes away, many collections are being broken up and sometimes sold second hand.
Economy an important opening topic
Opening the conference, the host, Indian Foreign Minister Khurshid, called for closer cooperation between the continents to promote economic growth on both sides.
Federal Foreign Minister Westerwelle emphasised that Germany was active in promoting free trade.
The Federal Government supports the peace process in eastern Congo
Following the end of fighting between the army and the M23 rebel group the situation in eastern Congo is starting to improve.
The UN mission MONUSCO has made a significant contribution to this.
Bild: UN soldiers protect the civilian population in eastern Congo
Following the end of fighting between Congolese armed forces and the M23 rebel group the situation in eastern Congo is starting to improve.
The UN Stabilization Mission in the DR Congo (MONUSCO) made a significant contribution to this.
The Federal Government welcomes the development and calls on the parties involved in the conflict to spare no time in completing negotiations on disarming and demobilising the M23 fighters.
Now that the M23 rebel group has withdrawn from the province of North Kivu in eastern Congo and around 1500 fighters have fled to Uganda, there are hopes that the situation will stabilise and the violence will cease.
This is not least thanks to the UN Stabilization Mission MONUSCO which, under the leadership of the German diplomat Martin Kobler, has worked in a determined manner to protect the civilian population affected by the fighting in the region.
The UN Mission was recently bolstered by a nearly 3000-man strong rapid Intervention Brigade.
It has authorisation from the United Nations Security Council to protect the civilian population, including by use of military force, from so-called “negative forces”.
Various rebel groups are still active in eastern Congo
Bild: Weapons seized by MONUSCO
Nevertheless various other rebel groups who perpetrate violence and pose a danger to the local population are still active in eastern Congo.
In the Federal Government’s view the Government in Kinshasa urgently needs to take decisive action against these groups.
Regional responsibility for peace and security
The Federal Government considers that the countries in the region also have an obligation to assume their responsibility for the development of the region and work decisively for the implementation of the Addis Ababa Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework Agreement which they concluded.
The Framework Agreement stipulates that the Democratic Republic of the Congo reforms its security organs and strengthens its state structures.
Moreover, in Addis Ababa the countries of the region committed to refrain from interfering in their neighbours’ domestic affairs, not to support any armed groups and to strengthen regional cooperation.
The international community, which is committed to security, stability and development in the Great Lakes Region, supports them in this endeavour.
Germany supports the population in need
Bild: Fleeing fighting in eastern Congo
According to estimates from the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees several thousand people have fled the combat.
Most refugees are women and children.
The Federal Government is striving to improve the humanitarian situation in the region and since 2012 it has made nearly 20 million euros available to provide for the civilian population as well as refugees and displaced persons.
Alongside humanitarian assistance Germany is also involved in development cooperation and contributes over 20 percent of EU cooperation in the region.
Furthermore Germany supports the UN Organization Stabilization Mission in the DR Congo (MONUSCO).
MONUSCO (Mission de l’Organisation des Nations Unies pour la stabilisation en RD Congo), the UN Peace mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, is currently the UN’s largest mission with over 19,000 soldiers and civilian personnel as well as a budget of over a billion US dollars per year.
After the M23 rebel group temporarily occupied the town of Goma in eastern Congo in December 2012, the Mission was bolstered by a 3000-man strong “Intervention Brigade”.
At the start of 2013, the German diplomat Martin Kobler took over leadership of the Mission as Special Representative of the Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.
Federal Foreign Minister Westerwelle in New Delhi
ASEM represents around 60% of global GDP, of world trade and the world’s population.
Other global issues such as the fight against terrorism, money-laundering, human trafficking and the challenges posed by climate change are also on the agenda.
During the meeting itself and particularly in bilateral talks on the margins there will be much discussion of the tensions in the South China and East China Seas, Syria, the Arab spring and the follow-up to the nuclear talks with Iran in Geneva.
ASEM (Asia-Europe Meeting) was founded in 1996 as a discussion forum intended to strengthen and give a greater measure of continuity to Euro-Asian interaction.
Since it is an informal forum, ASEM does not take any decisions.
Bilateral relations with India
Federal Foreign Minister Westerwelle greets his Indian colleague Khurshid
This is Foreign Minister Westerwelle’s third trip to India since taking office.
India and Germany have close and friendly ties; high-level official visits are frequent.
In 2006 Federal Chancellor Merkel and Prime Minister Manmohan Singh launched a Strategic Partnership between the two countries.
An important milestone in Indo-German relations was the Year of Germany in India, which ran from autumn 2011 to February 2013
ASEM Foreign Ministers gather in New Delhi
He went on to say that those he had spoken to appreciated Germany’s solidarity and willingness to help.
At the start of the meeting Federal Foreign Minister Westerwelle reaffirmed Germany’s solidarity with the victims of the typhoon.
“We want to curb the protectionist tendencies which unfortunately exist in the world,” he stated.
“Asia is now a key strategic partner for Europe,” Westerwelle stressed in New Delhi.
ASEM Foreign Ministers Meeting in New Delhi – focus on typhoon disaster
At the start of the Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) in New Delhi Federal Foreign Minister Westerwelle reaffirmed Germany’s solidarity with the victims of the typhoon in the Philippines.
Representatives of 51 states of the Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) have gathered for talks in New Delhi.
“Here there is an abundance of expressions of solidarity, and it is important for the world to stand together,” Federal Foreign Minister Westerwelle said today (11 November) in New Delhi in the wake of the typhoon disaster in the Philippines.
In an initial step at the weekend the Federal Government made available 500,000 euros for immediate emergency measures.
Numerous other countries also pledged their support in New Delhi.
“As an export-oriented country we are dependent on our products being freely traded throughout the world.
Investment should take place in both directions,” he said.
There are currently 51 ASEM partners.
ASEM summits are held every two years, alternating between Europe and Asia (most recently in Brussels in 2010 and Vientiane, Laos, in 2012).
The foreign ministers meet on the same basis (most recently in Gödöllo, Hungary) and ministers with other portfolios also meet from time to time.
In the afternoon Federal Foreign Minister Westerwelle will meet India’s Foreign Minister Khurshid for bilateral talks.
In 2012 Indo-German trade was worth 17.38 billion euros.
to commemorate the 60th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations (on 7 March 1951) between the Federal Republic of Germany and India.
Besides promoting political, economic and societal ties with partner countries, it offers support for their political and socio-economic reform agenda.
Bild: The Eastern Partnership countries: Ukraine, Moldova, Georgia, Belarus, Armenia and Azerbaijan (in orange)
Besides promoting political, economic and societal ties with partner countries, it offers support for their political and socio-economic reform agenda.
Germany and the European Union have a particular interest in developments in their immediate neighbourhood. Under the auspices of the European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) the EU therefore promotes political, economic and societal ties with its neighbouring states, as well as relations among these states.
The Eastern Partnership promotes the reform course these countries have embarked on and offers EU support that gives additional impetus to their political, economic and societal transformation.
Unfettered interpersonal contacts are a key element of functioning good neighbourly relations, whether in business, in science and research or in the private sphere.
Travellers from partner countries already enjoy a host of technical benefits, including lower visa fees and the possibility of arranging appointments online.
The Eastern Partnership does not address the question of EU accession.
How does the Eastern Partnership work?
The Eastern Partnership is the most ambitious offer of cooperation under the EU’s Neighbourhood Policy.
It is based in the first instance on the conclusion of comprehensive association agreements with the EU, DCFTAs (Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreements) forming part of them.
These association agreements will replace the existing and in some respects outdated partnership and cooperation agreements with the partner countries and place their relations with the EU on a new footing.
Negotiations on association agreements have been ongoing with all eastern partners except Belarus since 2010.
Bild: Germany is committed to the Eastern Partnership: Federal Chancellor Merkel at the Summit in Warsaw, 2011
How have relations with the eastern partners developed?
Relations with the EU’s eastern neighbours have developed in a very promising way over the past few years on this basis.
Bild: A public bus in Kyiv
The negotiations with Ukraine were concluded back in 2012.
However, the EU Foreign Ministers fixed a number of criteria for the signing of the agreement (free and fair elections, end of selective justice, progress with the reform agenda, particularly in the field of justice) and earmarked the Eastern Partnership Summit in Vilnius (Lithuania) on 28 and 29 November 2013 as a possible date for the signing – if the imposed conditions have been met.
The negotiations with Georgia and Moldova on the substance were also completed in the middle of 2013, the intention being for these agreements to be initialled in Vilnius as well.
The association and free trade agreement with Armenia has also been negotiated.
Following Armenia’s announcement that it is to join the Eurasian Customs Union, the EU and Armenia are currently discussing the future basis for their partnership.
It will no longer be possible to initial the agreement in Vilnius.
The negotiations with Azerbaijan are not yet ready for conclusion, but there has been some progress.
Given the current political situation in Belarus, there can at present be no negotiations on any further intensification of bilateral relations.
The EU has tied the launch of negotiations to the end of repression and the release of political detainees.
A milestone: Eastern Partnership Summit in Vilnius
Bild: View of Vilnius
The current Lithuanian European Union presidency has made the Eastern Partnership one of its priorities.
The Summit in Vilnius on 28 and 29 November 2013 will be of decisive importance for the further development of the Eastern Partnership.
The envisaged signing of the agreement with Ukraine and the initialling of those with Georgia and Moldova would have a historic dimension and would take the Partnership forward into a crucial new phase in which the implementation of the comprehensive association agendas and free trade agreements would stand at the fore.
Who steers the Eastern Partnership?
Meetings of Eastern Partnership Heads of State and Government take place every two years.
Among other things, it agreed on enhanced cooperation in the economic and trade spheres.
Bild: Eastern Partnership logo
The German Government is particularly keen for civil society in the partner countries to receive continued support and develop closer links with NGOs in the EU.
German emergency aid for the Philippines in the wake of Typhoon Haiyan
Federal Foreign Office and Federal Agency for Technical Relief send a team to the Philippines to assist typhoon victims.
Thousands of people have been made homeless.
The infrastructure has been largely destroyed.
At the request of the Federal Foreign Office and in close consultation with the Federal Ministry of the Interior, the Federal Agency for Technical Relief has sent an advance team to the Philippines.
Federal Foreign Minister Westerwelle, who is currently in India, expressed his condolences to the people affected.
"Germany wants to help. Germany will help," said Westerwelle before flying to New Delhi.
The German Embassy in Manila has established a crisis unit which can be contacted around the clock.
We support the Palestinian Authority in that we provide assistance, aid – material aid, we help foster economic development, because we believe that economic development will play a pivotal role in making people believe in the peace process.
But equally, in 1989, 9 November was a day of tremendous joy and great hope.
For me, the fact that 9 November marks both events – in different years of course – shows us that we must always be aware of our past so that we can shape the future responsibly.
And 9 November 1989 shows that it is possible to achieve democracy and the rule of law by peaceful means, and that also gives us hope for the future.
9 November 1989, the day of the fall of the Wall was not so long ago and there are still many people who can remember it.
As it is anything but easy for people who endured such horrors, who experienced concentration camps, who were persecuted, to even talk to us – the Germans – at all today.
In the capital, Berlin, there are now many places which enable you to gain an understanding of the events –
That is definitely the impression that I get when I am there, because you see just how much Germany – as a whole – lost by destroying Jewish life as it did.
This ensures that in places, in all the towns in Germany in fact, one can read what happened – what happened, for example, on 9 November on the Night of Broken Glass or on other occasions when Jews were persecuted.
We are also grateful for the fantastic work that the Central Council of Jews in Germany carries out – integrating people of the Jewish faith who have come here from Russia.
Nonetheless we must say –
However one cannot use criticism of Israeli policies – which of course also exists in Israel, the people of Israel have very varied political opinions – and which one has the right to express, as a veil. When generalisations come into play, and anti-Semitism and anti-Zionism are expressed, then I at least, take this very seriously.
We are working proactively for a two-state solution – a Jewish State of Israel and a Palestinian State.
As a citizen of Jewish faith, who was born and raised in Germany, I consider both events of 9 November – the fall of the Berlin Wall and the Night of Broken Glass – to be particularly important dates, which are symbolic of the contrasts in German history. What are your feelings in light of the concurrence of both of these events on 9 November?
The Night of Broken Glass on 9 November was an event which caused unbelievable humiliation for people of the Jewish faith – businesses were destroyed, synagogues ruined, there was public stigmatisation, whole families were rounded up and taken to concentration camps.
I have similar feelings to you, that 9 November is an exceptional day in Germany’s history.
After the arrival of an advance team from the Federal Agency for Technical Relief in Manila on Sunday, the remaining members of the German assistance team reached the Philippines on Sunday night.
The regions of Samar, Leyte, Negros Occidental, northern Cebu, Masbate and Iloilo have been particularly badly affected.
Travel and security advice for the region
Travel advice for Viet Nam, Cambodia and Laos has also been amended accordingly.
Current travel advice for Viet Nam, Cambodia and Laos
In the capital, Berlin, there are now many places which enable you to gain an understanding of the events – places such as the Memorial to the Murdered Jews of Europe, the Topography of Terror or even
The Embassy is in close contact with the local authorities as well as with German and international relief organisations.
They were welcomed by staff from the German Embassy in the Philippines and immediately began to assess the situation in close cooperation with Embassy personnel.
Their first priority is to establish what specific assistance is required.
Typhoon Haiyan, also known as Yolanda in the Philippines, is the most powerful storm ever to have hit the islands.
It swept across the Philippines last Friday with wind speeds of more than 300 km/h and, according to initial estimates, has claimed the lives of many thousands of people and left massive devastation in its wake.
At the weekend Federal Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle already promised the Philippines half a million euros in emergency aid in view of the massive scale of the destruction.
Germany helps typhoon victims
In its travel advice for the Philippines the Federal Foreign Office advises against unnecessary trips to the affected provinces.
Further information:
This innovative technology makes it possible to produce 3D projections of the digital model – on a screen, in the middle of a room, behind glass – as well as facsimiles and print-outs.
Preservation of cultural heritage
A precious artefact is, for the first time ever, to be presented to the press at the Federal Foreign Office on 12 November 2013 as an elaborate 3D scan: the Golden Letter sent by King Alaungphaya of Burma to George II, King of Britain and Elector of Hanover in 1756.
Today the original is kept at the Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Library in Hanover.
Cornelia Pieper, Minister of State at the Federal Foreign Office, has issued the following statement ahead of the presentation:
Germany increases aid for typhoon victims in the Philippines
During his speech before the 11th ASEM Foreign Ministers Meeting in New Delhi on Monday, he stressed, "Germany is ready to provide swift humanitarian assistance."
The Golden Letter cultural preservation project lends the agreement further substance.
Today this artefact is building bridges between Myanmar and Germany.
Ten young journalists from Myanmar, who are attending a media training course in Berlin with the help of the Federal Foreign Office, are reporting on this key cultural preservation project.
The German Government is making a further 1 million euros in emergency humanitarian aid available for dealing with the effects of Typhoon Haiyan/Yolanda in the Philippines.
Federal Foreign Minister Westerwelle made the following statement today (12 November) on the margins of the ASEM Foreign Ministers Meeting in New Delhi:
The historic document was digitised in 3D with the support of the Federal Foreign Office and the Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Library.
“Whole swathes of Philippine country have been devastated.
We want to help and stand by the many people who have been injured and made homeless in the areas destroyed by the typhoon.
The German Government is therefore making funds available which German relief organisations will use for their work helping the victims on the ground.”
Foreign Minister Westerwelle gained the latest news on the situation in the crisis areas during talks on the fringes of the New Delhi ASEM Meeting with the representative of the Philippines, Undersecretary Evan P. Garcia, to whom he also transmitted Germany’s sympathy and solidarity with the victims.
Germany had previously made available 500,000 euros in emergency aid on Sunday (10 November).
Germany increases emergency aid for typhoon victims
Foreign Minister Westerwelle and Undersecretary Evan P. Garcia
In the area affected by the disaster, much of the infrastructure has been destroyed.
The German Government has thus far made available 1.5 million euros in emergency humanitarian aid for dealing with the effects of the typhoon.
He spoke to Undersecretary Evan P. Garcia, representative of the Philippines, about the situation in the crisis areas on the fringes of the ASEM Foreign Ministers Meeting in New Delhi.
Typhoon victims receiving care
To that end, the German Government is making a further one million euros available for German aid agencies on the ground to help the victims.
Speaking on behalf of the German Government on Sunday (10 November), Foreign Minister Westerwelle promised half a million euros in emergency aid for the typhoon victims in the Philippines.
He went on to say that a decision would be made with the Embassy and the crisis unit “on what else we can provide in the way of assistance”.
The European Commission has also made emergency relief to the tune of three million euros available.
In its travel advice for the Philippines, the Federal Foreign Office advises against unnecessary trips to the affected provinces.
Typhoon Haiyan has claimed many lives and caused massive devastation in the Philippines.
“Germany wants to help. Germany will help,” he said before flying to New Delhi.
He assured the Undersecretary that “We want to help and stand by the many people who have been injured and made homeless in the areas destroyed by the typhoon.”
Current travel advice for Viet Nam, Cambodia and Laos Last updated on 11 November 2013
Message of greeting by Minister of State Pieper at the opening of the exhibition “From the Inside to the Outside” at the Centrum Judaicum in Berlin
Dr Simon, Dr Dirks, Excellencies and honoured guests of the Centrum Judaicum!
I am delighted to have the privilege of opening this special exhibition, on 11 November 2013, here in these premises.
Achieving greater understanding together
In efforts to find new approaches to relations between Germany and the Islamic world, the Federal Foreign Office is promoting measures to strengthen cultural dialogue between Germany and Islamic countries.
Relations between Western and Islamic societies are often dominated by misunderstandings.
At the same time, in most Islamic countries, Islamism, an ideology aiming to imprint the laws of Islam on state and society has become more popular in recent years.
The political concepts of democracy, universal human rights and pluralism are often rejected as “Western” and by extension “un-Islamic”.
Against this backdrop, Germany fosters dialogue with the Islamic world, thus continuing a tradition that began in the 19th century with Goethe and Rückert.
The dialogue aims both to promote understanding between the West and the Islamic world as well as pluralism in society and also to counter stereotypes and the tendency to see outsiders as enemies.
When it initiated the “Dialogue with the Islamic world” at the Federal Foreign Office in 2002, Germany became the first Western country to make this a political focus.
A Special Representative for Dialogue among Civilizations was appointed, a post currently held by Ambassador Heinrich Kreft.
He advises all levels of the Federal Foreign Office on questions of intercultural dialogue and is supported by a division that coordinates the dialogue with Islam at the German missions in the Islamic world.
Projects and exchange programmes
The most important associates in the implementation of intercultural dialogue projects and exchange programmes are partner organisations that work in the field of cultural relations and education policy such as the Goethe-Institut, the German Academic Exchange Service and the Institute for Foreign Cultural Relations.
Schools and education as well as working with young people are among the dialogue’s priorities.
Further emphasis is placed on events that stimulate the exchange of ideas within society in Islamic countries.
Communicating in the local language is the key to reaching the respective target group.
The elites who have been educated in local institutions are thus being addressed directly through projects in their native language and, in addition, it is possible to carry out more projects in rural areas.
In many countries, women and young people have no knowledge of Western languages.
Publications, workshops, film festivals, the website www.qantara.de as well as that of the German Information Centre in Cairo are widely read now that they are available in Arabic.
www.qantara.de German Centre in Cairo
The dialogue in Islamic countries cannot be separated from the dialogue with the approximately four million Muslims living in Germany.
They make up an important part of German public life.
Since September 2006 the German Islam Conference has served as a forum for regular dialogue between the government at the federal, Länder, and municipal levels and representatives of the Muslim community.
Having a globally-minded Islamic world as a neighbouring region is in Europe’s interest and increases the security of all.
Cultural dialogue with the Islamic world promotes peaceful coexistence, mutual respect, and joint efforts to improve the future.
Applications requesting funding for projects within the framework of the European-Islamic Intercultural Dialogue can be submitted to Division 609 (Cultural and Media Relations with the Maghreb, Near and Middle East) at the Federal Foreign Office.
Decisions on financial support are made on the basis of a criteria catalogue developed specifically for the programme.
On 11 November synagogues and houses were still being destroyed. The acts of terror continued until 16 November.
You had the idea and laid the foundations for this exhibition.
I am very grateful that you approached the Federal Foreign Office, the natural partner for your idea, which was very happy to embrace your concept.
Diplomatic reports are an important source of information for our professional day-to-day work and are a part of our job we take for granted.
We report on minor happenings, such as a meeting or a trip, but of course we also cover major events such as wars and unrest in the host country.
I would like to draw particular attention to those from Russian, Polish and Czech archives.
Without him, the exhibition would not be here.
And he put together the material quickly, professionally and with deep insight.
Preserving cultural heritage: The Golden Letter from Myanmar in 3D
A precious artefact from Myanmar has, for the first time ever, been presented to the public as a 3D scan: the Golden Letter from King Alaungphaya of Burma to King George II of Great Britain.
The project was financed from the Cultural Preservation Programme of the Federal Foreign Office.
Cultural treasure goes high tech: The Golden Letter from Myanmar as a 3D scan
Part of the Golden Letter
Today the original is kept at the Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Library in Hanover.
In Burma in 1756, King Alaungphaya ordered a letter to be written on a sheet of pure gold and decorated with 24 costly rubies.
The letter was addressed to King George II of Great Britain, who reigned simultaneously over the Electorate of Hanover and the Kingdom of Great Britain at the time.
It was transported inside the hollowed-out tusk of an elephant, which has also been preserved.
George II instead had the letter transferred to the royal library in Hanover, where it remained for 250 years before its secrets were deciphered.
The letter is prized among experts in Burmese culture as a unique artefact of global and colonial history.
It has pride of place in the collection of the Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Library (the Lower Saxony State Library) in Hanover.
The 3D scan of the Golden Letter
The historic document was digitised in 3D with the support of the Federal Foreign Office and the Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Library.
The innovative technology involved makes it possible to produce 3D projections of the digital model – on a screen, in the middle of a room, behind glass – as well as facsimiles and print-outs.
A representative reproduction of the Golden Letter is being created as an exhibit for the national museum currently under construction in Nay Pyi Taw (Myanmar).
Minister of State at the Federal Foreign Office Cornelia Pieper issued the following statement on the Golden Letter cultural preservation project:
Journalists from Myanmar at the Federal Foreign Office in Berlin
Ten young journalists from Myanmar, who are attending a media training course in Berlin with support from the Federal Foreign Office, are reporting on this extraordinary cultural preservation project.
Click here for more information on this project.
A precious artefact from Myanmar was presented to the public at the Federal Foreign Office for the first time ever on 12 November 2013 in the form of an elaborate 3D scan: the Golden Letter sent by King Alaungphaya of Burma to George II, King of Britain and Elector of Hanover, in 1756.
The royal missive was an offer of friendship extended to the British.
Nonetheless, when it reached London in 1758, after a journey of nearly two years, it went unanswered.
Cultural and media relations with Myanmar have developed unprecedented momentum since a bilateral cultural agreement was signed in July.
A second media training course, for example, is currently under way,
The Golden Letter bears witness to a diplomatic offer, though it was unsuccessful at the time.
The fact that, 75 years after the pogroms and the Holocaust, vibrant Jewish life is blossoming in Germany, and specifically here in Berlin, is a blessing.
You have consistently provided fresh ideas and always encouraged a new perspective on things,
as indeed you did in the case of this exhibition!
The view of Germany through foreign eyes is not a new area of research.
But what this exhibition does for the first time is to concentrate exclusively on the events of November 1938. Another innovation was the attempt to garner such reports from all over the world.
In a moment he will tell us himself in more detail what we are going to see.
The creation of this exhibition was a special form of international cooperation,
The next step is the opening of the Goethe-Institut in Rangoon, just in time for the 60th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations next year.
Through its Cultural Preservation Programme, the Federal Foreign Office helps protect cultural heritage around the world and foster cultural dialogue among partners.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle visits the United Arab Emirates
Enhancing bilateral relations and the crisis in Syria are the focus of the German Foreign Minister's discussions in Abu Dhabi.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle travelled on to the United Arab Emirates after taking part in the Asia-Europe Meeting of Foreign Ministers in New Delhi on 12 November.
On 12 and 13 November he is meeting Crown Prince Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan, Minister of Foreign Affairs Sheikh Abdullah bin Zayed Al Nahyan and Minister of Culture H.H. Sheikh Nahyan bin Mubarak Al Nahyan in Abu Dhabi.
In addition, talks with representatives from the business community are on the agenda.
Talks focus on Syria
Bild: Delegations in Hotel Jumeirah, Abu Dhabi
Foreign Minister Westerwelle is discussing how to continue cooperating to solve the conflict in Syria with UAE representatives.
Germany has worked on the Syria crisis more closely with the United Arab Emirates than with any other Arab country.
The Syria Trust Fund was jointly set up by the two countries.
It aims to fund projects to restore basic services in opposition-held areas and to strengthen moderate Syrian opposition forces.
Germany and the UAE also jointly chair the Group of Friends of the Syrian People, which has its headquarters in Berlin.
Joint efforts for "Geneva II"
Both Germany and the United Arab Emirates are urgently pursuing the goal of a swift launch of a political process in the Syria conflict.
The aim of the conference is to establish a "transitional governing body" endowed with full executive powers.
The drastic humanitarian situation in Syria and the ongoing fighting in the country continue to be a cause of great concern.
Close bilateral relations
Bild: Foreign Minister Westerwelle and Minister of Culture Sheikh Nahyan bin Mubarak Al Nahyan
Alongside close foreign policy cooperation on the Syria crisis and in the Friends of Yemen group, Germany and the UAE enjoy close economic ties.
The UAE is Germany's most important Arab trading partner.
Seminal cooperation also takes place in the field of renewable energies.
The United Arab Emirates, known as the UAE for short, comprises a federation of seven Emirates.
Relations between the United Arab Emirates and Germany
The Jewish people of this country had already been experiencing discrimination, persecution, exclusion and harassment for five years.
During these nights, anyone who had stayed was robbed, tortured, arrested, killed – as we know, the pogrom did not just take place in the night of 8 November.
We have a responsibility to ensure that the Shoah never recurs.
This place, the synagogue and the Centrum Judaicum, also bears witness to this development!
Even diplomatic reports on the November pogroms are not entirely new to historians.
Our thanks goes first and foremost to the archives of the foreign ministries of those countries which had representations in Germany in 1938 and who therefore reported “From the Inside to the Outside” and whose help we – the Federal Foreign Office and its missions abroad – requested.
a major project crossing borders and time zones which often proved to be a quite new experience for many of our staff at the missions abroad, involving making contact with the archive sections of their host country’s foreign ministry.
However, this exhibition – through the accounts of foreign diplomats – is primarily a memorial to the victims of the Night of the Broken Glass and a reminder of this watershed moment on the path to barbarism.
I hope this remarkable exhibition will attract many visitors and considerable attention.
By pooling our efforts in this way it was possible to compile an impressive range of reports and documents.
Aid supplies from Germany heading for the Philippines
Aid supplies for the Philippines being loaded
A flight arranged by the Federal Agency for Technical Relief and the German Red Cross took off from Berlin today to deliver 70 tons of aid to the Philippines.
Human Rights Commissioner Löning at Berlin Schönefeld airport while aid supplies are loaded
A flight arranged by the Federal Agency for Technical Relief and the German Red Cross took off from Berlin today to deliver 70 tons of aid to the Philippines.
Markus Löning, the Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid, was at Schönefeld airport to see the goods loaded and the plane sent on its way.
“The most important things now are the basic essentials for survival – drinking water and a roof over your head,” Löning underlined.
He went on to say that the disaster was estimated to have affected up to 10 million people and that more help would be forthcoming.
“We will undoubtedly be increasing our assistance further in the coming days,” he said prior to take-off. The flight is headed directly for Cebu, one of the affected regions.
He pointed out, however, that relief agencies on the ground would be assessing the situation before additional help could be provided, and that they would then coordinate and organise that help.
“We need to try and gain a clear picture of the situation first, while at the same time starting to get the absolute essentials to where they are needed,” he concluded.
More on Germany’s assistance to the typhoon victims
Foreign Minister Westerwelle on Ukraine -
missed chance
Foreign Minister Westerwelle issued the following statement today (13 November) in Abu Dhabi, whilst on his visit to the United Arab Emirates:
We hope that the EU Association Agreement with Ukraine will be signed at the Eastern Partnership Summit in Vilnius in two weeks.
For this to happen, Ukraine must fulfil the relevant conditions agreed upon in the EU.
We regret that the Ukrainian parliament was not able to reach an agreement regarding new legislation on medical treatment abroad today.
This means that a chance to find a solution to the Tymoshenko case has been missed.
There is little time left now.
The flight was made possible by emergency humanitarian assistance with Federal Foreign Office funding.
The emergency aid is being brought directly to Cebu, one of the badly affected regions.
He thanked the Red Cross and the Federal Agency for Technical Relief for their well–practised teamwork and the speed with which the delivery, which comprises water purification units, tents, cooking sets and hygiene items, had been put together.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle has made available an initial 1.5 million euros in emergency humanitarian aid for dealing with the effects of the typhoon.
It is an exhibition about reports – yes, really just reports, just paper.
Exactly 75 years ago the synagogues across Berlin, including those in this area, were set on fire. Even two days after the so-called Night of the Broken Glass, the smell of burning filled the air and the streets were indeed covered in broken glass and fragments of crystal.
Saul Friedländer adopted the image of “entrapment” – from 1933 – and “onslaught” on 9 November 1938 to describe the situation in which the Jewish population found itself.
Then came the worst horror of all: extermination.
We must not and will not ever forget what happened during those days.
Both the Federal Government and German civil society have an obligation to keep the memory alive, to pass it on to future generations and to ensure that Jewish citizens are able to feel secure and at home in Germany.
Dear Dr Simon, this is largely thanks to you and your tireless commitment.
At this time, when we remember the pogroms of November 1938, it focuses our attention on a very special historic source, diplomatic reports.
The diplomats at the Federal Foreign Office produce several hundred reports each day, composed in all corners of the world and sent to the Head Office in Berlin.
And in November 1938 our foreign colleagues had to witness first hand how their host country was transformed before their very eyes into a scene from hell for an entire section of the population.
This is reflected in the reports, which are written form different angles, depending on the author.
Through our joint project numerous reports previously unknown to the public have been rediscovered.
This exhibition allows the general public to see and to read for the first time how foreign diplomats perceived the events in Germany and the pogrom against Jewish fellow citizens.
I thank you, Excellencies, for your excellent cooperation and would ask you to pass on our heartfelt thanks to your head offices!
I would also like to thank Dr Christian Dirks, who quite literally made this exhibition.
From the Inside to the Outside: the November 1938 pogroms in diplomatic reports from Germany
To mark 75 years since the November pogroms, an exhibition has been dedicated to the reports written by foreign diplomats about the events of November 1938.
Minister of State Cornelia Pieper opened the exhibition in Berlin’s Centrum Judaicum on 11 November.
The New Synagogue in Berlin
This November, it is 75 years since the Nazi regime’s pogroms targeting Germany’s Jewish population.
Members of the SA and SS smashed up the shops and homes of Jewish citizens.
Anti-Semitic violence claimed more than 1300 lives on 9 November and the following days.
On 10 November alone, more than 30,000 Jews were taken to concentration camps.
The objective was to destroy Jewish live in Germany.
At least 1400 synagogues and other Jewish places of worship were badly damaged or destroyed during the course of the November pogroms.
Exhibition shows foreign diplomats’ reports on the November pogroms
From the Inside to the Outside: the exhibition at the Centrum Judaicum
This is the first joint exhibition by the Federal Foreign Office and the Centrum Judaicum showing foreign diplomats’ reports on the November pogroms.
Most of them are hitherto unknown reports which the Federal Foreign Office and German Embassies and Consulates around the world have brought together.
The Federal Foreign Office has provided the exhibition with both financial and material support.
It sent Notes Verbales – official Federal Foreign Office communications – to the Embassies of those countries which maintained diplomatic missions in Germany in 1938.
Within a short time, more than 20 reports had been rounded up in cooperation with those countries’ archives.
The exhibition shows how diplomats perceived the terrible incidents on the streets, the suffering of the victims and the response of the population and reported on them to the capital cities of their home countries.
Close collaboration between the Federal Foreign Office and the Centrum Judaicum
Minister of State Pieper at the exhibition opening with Dr Simon, Director of the Centrum Judaicum, and Dr Dirks, the exhibition curator
It was initiated by Dr Hermann Simon, the Director of the Centrum Judaicum, with exhibition curator Dr Christian Dirks as academic advisor in close liaison with a specially established advisory council which included a Federal Foreign Office representative.
In her opening speech, she underlined the responsibility which Government and civil society in Germany bear to ensure that what followed the November pogroms – namely the Shoah – is never repeated.
Speech by Minister of State Pieper at the exhibition opening
From the Inside to the Outside is open to visitors in the historical rooms of the New Synagogue on Oranienburger Strasse from 12 November 2013 until 11 May 2014.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle visits the United Arab Emirates
The German Foreign Minister's discussions in Abu Dhabi focused on enhancing of bilateral relations, Iran and Syria.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle visited the United Arab Emirates on 12 and 13 November.
The German Foreign Minister's discussions in Abu Dhabi focused on enhancing bilateral relations, the ongoing negotiations on Iran's nuclear programme and the crisis in Syria.
Bild: The Crown Prince welcomes the Foreign Minister
The German Foreign Minister spent around 24 hours in Abu Dhabi, the capital of the United Arab Emirates (UAE).
Talks with representatives from the fields of politics and business were on the agenda – on global issues, such as the negotiations on Iran's nuclear programme or the crisis in Syria, and equally on bilateral cooperation.
Crown Prince Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan even invited the German Foreign Minister to meet him for a discussion – a particular honour.
On 12 November the visit started with a reception hosted by Sheikh Nahyan bin Mubarak Al Nahyan, Minister of Culture, Youth and Community Development.
This was followed by a breakfast with representatives from the business sector on 13 November, at the invitation of the Chairman of the Department of Economic Development of Abu Dhabi, Nasser Alsowaidi.
"We are connected by a network of many varied contacts. This solid foundation is becoming ever stronger", stated the German Foreign Minister.
With over 900 firms in the country, Germany was well placed in the UAE, continued Westerwelle.
Syria the focus of discussions
Bild: Foreign Minister Sheikh Abdullah with his German counterpart Westerwelle
According to Westerwelle in Abu Dhabi, "we also enjoy a close partnership in working on economic reconstruction in Syria".
It aims to fund projects to restore basic services in opposition-held areas and to strengthen moderate Syrian opposition forces.
In view of the next planned Syria conference "Geneva II", both sides have welcomed that last weekend the Syrian Opposition declared its willingness, in principle, to participate.
Exchange of opinions on the ongoing negotiations with Iran
"We are interested in hearing the assessment of the United Arab Emirates - our closest partner in the region - on the region's response to the negotiations with Iran," emphasised Foreign Minister Westerwelle at a press conference after his meeting with UAE Minister of Foreign Affairs Sheikh Abdullah bin Zayed Al Nahyan.
The UAE had shown an interest in hearing the German Foreign Minister's report on the P5+1 discussions, which took place in Geneva up to last Saturday (9 November).
Alongside close foreign policy cooperation such as on the Syria crisis or in the Friends of Yemen group, Germany and the United Arab Emirates enjoy close economic ties.
Every year goods worth approximately 10 billion euros are exported to the United Arab Emirates – the focus lying on state-of-the-art German technology.
There were also important projects in the field of renewable energy, said Westerwelle in Abu Dhabi.
Relations in the areas of culture and education are also flourishing, for example via higher education cooperation between RWTH Aachen University and Freie Universität Berlin and UAE institutes, via the German-UAE College of Logistics, as well as through a total of three German schools in the UAE.
The largest – and also the capital – is Abu Dhabi.
Overall 5.5 million people live in the UAE, of which 3.9 million are foreigners.
Around 12,000 Germans live in the UAE, there are an estimated 900 German firms in the country.
Relations between the United Arab Emirates and Germany
In collaboration with the Federal Foreign Office, the New Synagogue Berlin – Centrum Judaicum Foundation has collated documents from more than 20 countries.
This exhibition is seeing these sources comprehensively and systematically examined for the first time.
Cornelia Pieper, Minister of State at the Federal Foreign Office, opened the From the Inside to the Outside exhibition on 11 November.
More information is available on the New Synagogue Berlin – Centrum Judaicum Foundation website.
Film Abu Dhabi:
Touch-down at Abu Dhabi airport:
not only in the field of foreign policy but also in the renewable energy sector and in cooperative programmes between universities.
The meeting was hosted by the Chairman of Abu Dhabi’s Department of Economic Development, Nasser Al Sowaidi.
Germany exports around 10 billion euros’ worth of goods to the United Arab Emirates per year.
Crown Prince Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan also granted the German Minister a meeting – a particular honour.
The UAE demonstrated particular interest in the ongoing negotiations about the Iranian nuclear programme.
Germany’s Foreign Minister Westerwelle was in the United Arab Emirates for around 24 hours.
Talks with politicians and businesspeople were planned for 12 and 13 November in Abu Dhabi.
The visit began with a reception given by Culture Minister Sheikh Nahyan Bin Mubarak Al Nahyan.
Iran remained high on the agenda during talks at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle gave a joint press conference alongside his counterpart Sheikh Abdullah Bin Zayed Al Nahyan.
We enjoy a close partnership that also extends to our work for economic reconstruction.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle approves a further 3 million euros of humanitarian aid
Today (14 November), Foreign Minister Westerwelle telephoned the Secretary of Foreign Affairs of the Philippines, Albert F. del Rosario.
Secretary del Rosario described the situation in the crisis area, explained the Philippine Government’s aid measures and expressly thanked Germany for its very swiftly dispatched humanitarian support.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle expressed Germany’s sympathy to his counterpart in light of the devastating natural disaster and its many victims, announced further aid and promised that Germany would contribute to the reconstruction of affected areas.
Following today’s crisis unit meeting in the Federal Foreign Office, Foreign Minister Westerwelle decided to bolster humanitarian aid to the Philippines with a further 3 million euros.
With the 1.5 million euros which have already been pledged, 4.5 million euros are now available for emergency humanitarian assistance.
The projects receiving funding include a Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement base camp, which has been erected by the German Red Cross in the region, and German aid organisation measures, which aim to construct emergency shelter and restore the provision of water, medical and food supplies to the affected population.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle said their two countries were connected by a network of many varied contacts –
This includes the establishment of a Trust Fund –
which again is chaired jointly by the UAE and Germany.
The two countries also share joint chairmanship of the Berlin-based Group of Friends of the Syrian People.
on economic cooperation certainly, but above all on the efforts being made in the Syrian crisis.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle attends Asia-Europe Meeting in New Delhi
The 51 Foreign Ministers of ASEM, the Asia-Europe Meeting, convened in New Delhi.
While there, Foreign Minister Westerwelle also spoke to the Undersecretary representing the Philippines to express Germany’s sympathy and solidarity with the victims of Typhoon Haiyan.
New Delhi, 11 November 2013.
The German Foreign Minister’s car wends its way towards the ASEM conference.
International assistance to provide emergency relief, and help reconstruction, was first of all discussed behind closed doors.
The first statement came at lunchtime.
“The summit here in New Delhi has been overshadowed by a truly dreadful natural disaster.
Messages of solidarity are flooding in...”
Germany was among those expressing solidarity.
Shortly before taking off, the Foreign Minister had announced an initial 500,000 euros in aid.
It is therefore a question of solidarity for us to help the people and above all the whole of the affected regions to deal with the natural disaster and set about reconstruction.
Germany stands ready to do so, and that willingness to help is appreciated by our partners here.”
Foreign Minister Westerwelle had a further opportunity to underline Germany’s willingness to help when he later spoke to Undersecretary Garcia of the Philippines.
a fact that was raised at a breakfast with representatives of the business sector on 13 November.
After their meeting, Sheikh Abdullah drove the Minister to the next appointment in his private car – and then it was back to the airport that afternoon.
As the German Foreign Minister saw it, the visit had been a success. Progress had been made on many points, he said –
Further aid for the Philippines
Foreign Minister Westerwelle announced the move following a phone call with his Philippine counterpart and today’s meeting of the crisis unit at the Federal Foreign Office.
Aid supplies being loaded onto the plane
He assured the Undersecretary that “We want to help and stand by the many people who have been injured and made homeless in the areas destroyed by the typhoon”.
The German Government is making available a further three million euros in emergency humanitarian aid for the Philippines to deal with the effects of Typhoon Haiyan.
To that end, the German Government made an initial 1.5 million euros available for German aid agencies on the ground to help the victims of the typhoon.
Philippine Foreign Minister Albert F. del Rosario also described the situation in the crisis areas to Minister Westerwelle on the phone on Thursday (14 November).
During the call, Minister del Rosario expressed sincere thanks for the help which had come so rapidly from Germany.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle pledged Germany’s long-term support for reconstruction in the affected regions in addition to the emergency humanitarian aid.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle speaks to the Philippine Undersecretary in New Delhi
Markus Löning, Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid, speaking to the team from the Federal Agency for Technical Relief
The first flight bringing aid from the Federal Agency for Technical Relief and the German Red Cross landed in Cebu, one of the affected regions, on Thursday morning, carrying 70 tons of supplies.
Volunteers from the agency were also on board and are now working in the region to provide the people there with clear drinking water and repair the disrupted water supply systems.
The projects funded from the emergency aid budget also include a base camp being built in the area by the German Red Cross.
Foreign Minister had already spoken to the Philippine representative, Undersecretary Evan P. Garcia, about the situation in the crisis areas on the fringes of the ASEM Foreign Ministers Meeting in New Delhi at the beginning of the week.
The plans for the meeting in India were long-standing, no-one having expected the typhoon disaster in the Philippines which struck shortly before it began.
“The true extent of the disaster is still unknown; all we can say at this time is that what we do know is shocking.
The Undersecretary described to him the vast scale of the disaster, the devastation and the difficult situation faced by the people affected.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle conveyed Germany’s sympathy to Undersecretary Garcia
At the most important synagogue in Brazil, Germany facilitates preservation and the construction of a museum
As part of its work in preserving significant cultural properties around the world, the Federal Foreign Office is funding the conservation of the Beth El Synagogue, set to be the heart of the Jewish Museum in São Paulo, Brazil.
This is why, on 14 November 2013, the German Consul-General in São Paulo signed a funding agreement for a total of 310,000 euros.
Nestled in the centre of São Paulo, the future museum will be located both within the synagogue itself and in a modern glass annexe.
It will provide information on the history and culture of Judaism as well as its contribution to forming Brazil.
With this project, the Federal Government is lining up to its commitment to make a contribution to preserving and supporting Jewish culture.
Jews came to Brazil with the first Portuguese settlers back at the beginning of the 16th century.
During the period of National Socialism around 20,000 German Jews fled to Brazil and set up a new home there.
They made a valuable contribution to the country's cultural and economic development.
The Beth El Synagogue, inaugurated in 1932, is the most important Jewish religious building in Brazil.
For more information on the Cultural Preservation Programme of the Federal Foreign Office click here www.diplo.de
"Where ideas come together" - Germany + Brazil 2013-2014
The global financial crisis has mercilessly revealed a significant structural flaw in the European Union treaties:
A monetary union in which economic, financial and budgetary policy are not closely coordinated cannot function in the long term.
The intensive crisis diplomacy of recent years has led to a series of new instruments and agreements, such as the ESM and the fiscal compact.
With the 1.5 million euros previously pledged, a total of 4.5 million euros is now available for emergency humanitarian assistance in the south-eastern regions of the Philippines which were devastated by the typhoon.
Philippine Foreign Minister Albert F. del Rosario also described the situation in the crisis areas to Minister Westerwelle on the phone on Thursday (14 November).
Foreign Minister Westerwelle signing the book of condolences in the Philippine Embassy
On Friday (15 November), the Foreign Minister paid a visit to the Embassy of the Philippines in Berlin to sign the book of condolences there.
“Readiness to help,” he emphasised, “is very high in Germany.”
Speaking briefly to the Embassy staff, he pointed out the German Government was helping the people in the Philippines affected by the typhoon disaster, adding that “I am quite sure that the people of Germany will be helping as private individuals too”.
The ambitious measures implemented in our neighbouring countries deserve our respect.
The adopted reforms are beginning to take effect.
However, we are not out of the woods yet by a long way.
Youth unemployment is unacceptably high in many European countries.
The debt crisis has led to an unprecedented crisis of confidence.
The danger is that many citizens will lose sight of the value of European integration.
The economic crisis could then mutate into a fundamental political crisis.
Populist, nationalist and Eurosceptic parties are on the upswing.
We must not abandon the field to the Eurosceptics.
The ideas populists and nationalists of all shades are now propagating throughout Europe are not real solutions.
If the crisis has taught us one thing, it is that less Europe is not a solution!
But a better Europe could be.
Only by joining forces do we have the resources and strength we need to overcome this crisis.
A high turnout for the elections is vital.
This is the only way to prevent the rise in the European Parliament of those who really want to do away with the European project by means of populist arguments.
Yet people will only participate if they can see that the EU is playing an active part in resolving specific major problems.
That means that the EU must demonstrate “problem-solving skills”.
In the long term we must think beyond the crisis if we are to build a “better” Europe and provide “real” solutions.
Over the last two years a group of eleven pro-European foreign ministers has focused on the future of the European project.
Strengthening the economic and monetary union has to be the absolute priority, because our joint economic success depends on the euro.
A functioning euro area requires fundamental reforms in all fields with a bearing on the euro:
We need progress in the banking union, the fiscal union, the economic union and in strengthening democratic legitimacy.
Germany regards the cohesion of the EU as a whole as a valuable asset!
The EU must become a more prominent player on the international stage.
Our greatest interest, and a Herculean task for foreign policy, lies in shaping globalisation in a spirit of peaceful international cooperation.
No European country can do this singlehandedly.
To this end the EU must define its international profile more sharply.
We have to become more assertive in our decision-making.
And we need more majority decisions within the common foreign and security policy.
However, it should not regulate issues which could be resolved more effectively at local, regional or national level.
In this I wholeheartedly agree with the words of Commission President Barroso that
The implementation of the subsidiarity principle is inextricably linked to the citizen-friendliness we expect from the EU.
The drafting of reform initiatives, including treaty amendments, requires determination and persistence.
A strong European executive embedded in a true parliamentary system should be our aim.
I am delighted that the European Commission is thinking along the same lines.
That is why I have come together with a number of EU colleagues to launch an initiative
to ensure better protection of European fundamental values and principles of the rule of law also within the European Union.
We are witnessing an unprecedented phase of globalisation, driven by high-speed technological innovation.
We still have a lot to do.
This task needs to be tackled both within political parties and in dialogue with citizens.
Europe is more than its institutions, more than its member states and more than a single market and free trade area.
It is also far more than a single currency.
Above all else, Europe is a community based on a shared culture and common values.
More help for the Philippines The German Government has increased its emergency humanitarian aid for the Philippines by a further two million euros, bringing the total to 6.5 million euros.
A functioning economic and monetary union and efficient external action should be the hallmarks of a strong EU.
The German Government is making available a further two million euros in emergency aid for the Philippines to deal with the effects of Typhoon Haiyan.
We must not be content with merely strengthening the economic and monetary union. Rather, we have to improve the way the EU as a whole operates.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle announced the move following a meeting of the crisis unit at the Federal Foreign Office on Saturday (16 November).
There are increasing indications that the worst is behind us.
The funds are being put at the disposal of German and international aid agencies, which will use them to get urgently needed supplies to the people in the devastated areas.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle issued the following statement on the matter on Saturday (16 November):
“Germany stands in solidarity with the people of the Philippines.
I am very pleased to see how generously the German people are prepared to donate for the people of the Philippines.”
Foreign Minister Westerwelle had already spoken to the Philippine representative, Undersecretary Evan P. Garcia, about the situation in the crisis areas on the fringes of the ASEM Foreign Ministers Meeting in New Delhi on 11 November.
On Thursday (14 November), the first flight bringing aid from the Federal Agency for Technical Relief and the German Red Cross landed in Cebu, one of the affected regions, carrying 70 tons of supplies.
The delivery included urgently needed tents, cooking sets, hygiene items and plastic sheeting as well as water purification units from the Federal Agency for Technical Relief.
The Emirates are Germany’s most important Arab trading partner,
Regional issues were touched on, such as the Middle East peace process, as was bilateral cooperation in business, culture and research.
Both men also once again underlined their partnership with regard to the Syrian crisis.
ASEM, the Asia-Europe Meeting, holds regular exchanges of views between its 51 countries, this time represented by their Foreign Ministers.
and was also able to give him some good news, namely that Germany would be sending another one million euros in aid.
The triad of solidarity, consolidation and new growth through increased competitiveness is bearing fruit.
We have to generate sustainable growth again and make the EU globally competitive.
Many people’s faith in the EU’s ability to provide effective and viable solutions in times of economic difficulty has been shaken.
Next year’s European elections will be a crucial milestone for the European integration project.
All parties now have a responsibility to set out how the future of Europe should look.
Your Congress’s motto is:
I believe that the following two points emerging from their deliberations are particularly important:
This involves developing our network of ties with the world’s new centres of power.
We need Europe to ensure that our values and interests have a voice in tomorrow’s world.
“the EU should be big on big things and smaller on smaller things”.
The goal of our efforts in what no doubt will be a long process should be a system based on the separation of powers in Europe which can boast effective decision-making processes and which enjoys unrestricted democratic legitimacy.
Meeting of EU Foreign Ministers in Brussels EU Foreign Ministers meet in Brussels today for the Foreign Affairs Council.
The discussions focus on preparations for the Eastern Partnership Summit.
EU Foreign Ministers meet in Brussels today for the Foreign Affairs Council.
The discussions focus on preparation for the Eastern Partnership Summit which is set to take place on 28 and 29 November in Vilnius.
Today, the EU Foreign Ministers will primarily discuss the situation in Ukraine, where until the end of November the issue of the Association Agreement to be concluded with the European Union is on the table.
Nevertheless before this can happen, according to Westerwelle, requirements must be fulfilled -
this includes the rule of law above all.
In this regard the case of Yulia Tymoshenko, the imprisoned opposition politician, is of particular importance.
Bild: European flags
At the opening of the meeting Foreign Minister Westerwelle once again voiced the EU Member States' desire for Ukraine to turn towards Europe.
Nevertheless the requirements for this must be fulfilled and these include the rule of law above all else.
In this regard, he stated that the case of the imprisoned opposition politician Yulia Tymoshenko was particularly significant.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle continued:
Ukraine is urgently called upon to act now and to agree on a viable path to strengthen the rule of law.
Ukraine cannot play for time now.
Time is running out and everyone in Ukraine must be aware of this.
Discussions focus on Ukraine
In this connection Westerwelle also reiterated the Federal Government's offer to fly Tymoshenko to Germany for medical treatment.
Westerwelle had made this offer to President Yanukovych in person the last time he visited Ukraine:
I think that this offer could serve as a good bridge between all parties involved, as it is clear that the Tymoshenko case is particularly significant with regard to the requirement to renounce selective justice.
This is our common view in the EU.
At the EU Foreign Minister meeting the conflict in Syria and the elimination of Syria’s chemical weapons stockpiles, as well as the situation in Egypt following the lifting of the state of emergency were also discussion topics.
Looking ahead: General Affairs Council
The General Affairs Council will meet in Brussels on Tuesday.
The session will primarily address preparation for the European Council on 19 and 20 December.
Meeting of EU Foreign Ministers in Brussels
EU Foreign Ministers met in Brussels today for the Foreign Affairs Council.
Their discussions focused on preparations for the Eastern Partnership Summit.
EU Foreign Ministers met in Brussels today for the Foreign Affairs Council.
The discussions focused on preparations for the Eastern Partnership Summit which is set to take place on 28 and 29 November in Vilnius.
The EU Foreign Ministers primarily discussed the situation in Ukraine, where until the end of November the issue of the Association Agreement to be concluded with the European Union is on the table.
Bild: Foreign Minister Westerwelle in Brussels
Nevertheless, the requirements for this had to be fulfilled and these included the rule of law above all else, according to Westerwelle.
In this regard, the case of the imprisoned former Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko was particularly significant.
At the end of today's EU Foreign Minister discussions, Westerwelle stated that the offer of an Association Agreement was not only of historical interest to Ukraine, but also expressly in the interest of Europe and the EU.
Only a few days were left in order to complete the final steps necessary.
The window of opportunity was still open, yet care had to be taken not to miss this chance.
The rule of law is an essential pillar supporting the bridge leading to Europe.
Many of criteria have already been fulfilled, there has been visible progress in Ukraine.
However the renunciation of selective justice must be credibly substantiated by concrete decisions and steps.
Solution for Tymoshenko
In this connection Westerwelle also reiterated the Federal Government's offer to admit Tymoshenko to Germany for medical treatment.
He had made this offer to President Yanukovych in person the last time he visited Ukraine. There remains little time for a swift solution.
Alongside Ukraine, the EU’s other eastern partners - Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Moldova and Belarus - also deserved the political attention of the EU member states, continued Westerwelle.
Also on the agenda - Syria and Egypt
Bild: Foreign Affairs Council in Brussels
At the EU Foreign Minister meeting the conflict in Syria and the elimination of Syria’s chemical weapons stockpiles, as well as the situation in Egypt following the lifting of the state of emergency were also discussion topics.
The EU Foreign Ministers made a renewed appeal to all parties involved in the conflict in Syria to opt for the path of political dialogue and to support the peace conference planned in Geneva.
According to Westerwelle, the elimination of Syria's chemical weapons would make an important contribution to this.
The stockpiles should be removed from the country and destroyed by the end of the year.
Germany wanted to be involved technically, logistically and financially.
Following the lifting of the state of emergency, Egypt now had the chance to increase the pace on the road towards a new constitution and elections.
Egypt's political leadership must now seize this chance and thus lay down the foundation for an inclusive political process.
The EU Foreign Ministers adopted the following Council conclusions:
Council conclusions on the regional impact of the Syria crisis
Council conclusions on Libya
Council conclusions on Tunisia (in French)
It will primarily address preparation for the European Council on 19 and 20 December.
Speech by Federal Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle at the opening of the 24th European Congress of the Union of European Federalists
We have thus undertaken tremendous efforts to prevent the collapse of the eurozone and the “contagion” of EU countries outside the euro area.
This forward-looking perspective is appropriate and particularly important in the light of the European elections.
Last but not least, the relations between the euro states and those EU members that do not yet belong to the monetary union are also an important factor.
We need a European External Action Service with greater political clout.
Moreover, foreign policy does not merely comprise common foreign and security policy. We also need more coordinated activity in external economic affairs policy, development aid, enlargement and neighbourhood policy, the management of migration flows, climate negotiations and energy security.
I am convinced that you will be sending a strong message at the conference promoting this type of discussion.
if we prove our credibility in this way, this will also lead to the development of a clearer orientation and restore trust in Europe.
Minister of State Link on the adoption of the EU Financial Framework 2014-2020
What image does Germany have abroad?
Germany attracts talent and investment Germany retains its second place in this year’s Nation Brands Index, recognised as the second-most attractive country right after the United States.
The outcome is that
Germany is ranked second, right behind the United States.
Each of these fields is measured according to various indicators.
We want to boost research and innovation in order to support young people via exchange programmes and help them find a foothold on the career ladder.
Second place in the Nation Brands Index
Today (19 November) Michael Georg Link, Minister of State at the Federal Foreign Office, speaking in Brussels on the fringes of the EU General Affairs Council, issued the following statement on the adoption of the EU Multiannual Financial Framework (2014-2020) by the European Parliament:
I welcome the European Parliament’s approval of the Multiannual Financial Framework.
To compose the rankings, the market research institute GfK surveyed over 20,000 people spread across more than 20 countries.
The new EU Financial Framework is growth-oriented, prudent and economical
At the same time, it remains prudent and economical in its scope.
The new financial framework has a longer-term focus on growth than its predecessors.
This is good news, for it means that over the next seven years around 1000 billion euros will be available for Europe to spend on important tasks.
Rankings in the immigration and investment field, for example, are made up of the international view of the quality of a country’s education system, its quality of life, and the equal opportunities and investment environment it provides.
Germany is ranked second, as it was last year, behind the United States and ahead of the United Kingdom, France and Canada.
It was important for us that the EU budget acquire a more defined focus, geared towards growth, competitiveness and employment.
On immigration and investment, Germany is in third place behind the US and Canada – a sign that the debt crisis in Europe has not done lasting damage to Germany’s reputation among foreign investors.
Many of Germany’s key priorities have been incorporated into the new financial framework.
A view of the Black Forest
We also did well on quality of life, job and training opportunities, and the rule of law.
Germany’s weakest result was in tourism, more specifically in the natural beauty category.
In 23rd place, it would seem that the castles on the Rhine and the Black Forest do not quite match up to the Grand Canyon or France’s Camargue region in the eyes of international tourists.
Germany’s tourism campaigns have some catching up to do.
The Nation Brands Index was developed in 2005 by Professor Simon Anholt and is run by the market research institute GfK.
The Nation Brands Index investigates the global reputations of 50 countries with respect to governance, culture, people, tourism, exports and immigration/investment.
It measures the global reputations of 50 countries using interviews with over 20,000 people spread across more than 20 countries.
Syria – Human Rights Commissioner concerned about the fate of missing men
Regime forces have kept the Damascus suburb of
Mouadamiyeh and further areas of the outskirts of the Syrian capital sealed off from food and medical supplies for over a year.
At the end of October 1800 civilians were evacuated from Mouadamiyeh.
According to Syrian human rights organisations, many of the men who were evacuated were then arrested, since then more than 200 men are classed as “disappeared”.
Markus Löning, Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy, issued the following statement today (19 November):
I am concerned about the unexplained fate of more than 200 men who were evacuated from the town of Mouadamiyeh at the end of October.
It is very alarming to hear reports alleging that they have been arrested and could be in air force intelligence interrogation centres.
I call on those responsible in Damascus to disclose the whereabouts of those who have disappeared and to guarantee protection and care for all prisoners.
The forced disappearances of thousands of people since the beginning of the conflict is a serious violation of human rights and international humanitarian law, which spreads fear and horror amongst the Syrian civilian population.
I condemn this form of arbitrary state action in the strongest possible terms.
The number of people in Syria who have “disappeared” has increased dramatically over the course of the conflict.
According to United Nations estimates, in addition to this some 355,000 people in Syria are cut off from any form of humanitarian aid.
What is the reputation of our education system and quality of life? How easy is it to invest or be a tourist?
The Nation Brands Index expresses how attractive a country is in numerical terms, based on extensive surveys conducted in more than 20 countries.
It will therefore be possible to use funds from the EU budget to provide the necessary momentum for growth in the European regions and thus help bring the standard of living in all parts of Europe more into line with one another.
We succeeded in preventing the introduction of an EU tax.
“The latest round of negotiations with Iran about its nuclear programme has demonstrated that a diplomatic solution to the conflict is possible.
We may well manage to make important progress in the talks starting in Geneva today.
We expect Iran to demonstrate convincingly to the international community that it does not intend to use its nuclear programme for military purposes.
The key aim at this time is to launch an initial phase of concrete confidence-building measures.
Diplomatic solution to nuclear conflict possible
The aim at this time is to launch an initial phase of concrete confidence-building measures.
The nuclear talks with Iran entered the next round today with a first meeting between EU High Representative Ashton and Foreign Minister Javad Zarif of Iran.
Back then, EU High Representative Ashton managed, together with Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle and his US, British, French and Russian counterparts, and the Deputy Chinese Foreign Minister, to inject new momentum into the process.
It was the first time that concrete progress had been achieved on the path towards an initial agreement on the Iranian nuclear programme.
Ashton had previously coordinated her position with representatives of the E3+3, comprising the three EU countries Germany, France and Britain, as well as the US, Russia and China.
Foreign Ministers Hague, Zarif and Westerwelle with EU High Representative Ashton (from left).
Early November in Geneva
The German delegation is again led by Hans-Dieter Lucas, the Political Director at the Federal Foreign Office.
We consider it unacceptable for Iran to be armed with nuclear weapons.
More information on the negotiations on the Iranian nuclear programme
Preventing the nuclear armament of Iran
International Conference Centre, Geneva:
Mandate extension for the peace missions in the Sudan and South Sudan
Germany wishes to continue its participation in the peace missions UNAMID and UNMISS.
Their main tasks are improving the security situation in Darfur and consolidating peace in South Sudan.
Germany wishes to continue its participation in the UN peace missions UNAMID and UNMISS in the Sudan and South Sudan.
The missions’ key tasks are improving the security situation in Darfur and consolidating peace in South Sudan.
The decision taken by the Federal Government still requires parliamentary approval from the Bundestag.
In its Cabinet meeting on 20 November, the Federal Government decided to continue its engagement in the two United Nations (UN) missions –
in the UN-led peace mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and in the mission of the UN and the African Union (AU) in Darfur (UNAMID).
The mandate for both missions runs out at the end of the year.
If the German Bundestag approves the Cabinet decision the mandates will be extended to 31 December 2014.
They provide for the deployment of up to 50 German soldiers in each mission.
Improving the security situation in Darfur
The joint peace mission of the UN and AU in Darfur (UNAMID) aims to monitor the implementation of the Darfur peace agreements, which were concluded in 2006 in Abuja (Nigeria) and 2011 in Doha (Qatar).
Protecting civilians and humanitarian workers as well as promoting human rights are further tasks of the mission.
The situation in Darfur remains tense despite the peace agreements –
there are regular clashes between Government troops, rebels and militia.
The Bundeswehr has been involved in UNAMID since 2007, currently providing nine soldiers.
Moreover, at the reconstruction conference for Darfur in Doha on 7 April 2013, Germany pledged funding totalling 16 million euros to support refugees and the population in conflict areas.
Consolidating peace in South Sudan
The UN peace mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) aims to support the Government in consolidating peace – thus promoting state building and economic development on a more long-term basis.
The UNMISS also works to implement the rule of law and strengthen the security and justice sectors.
South Sudan has been independent for two and a half years.
From an economic perspective, the young country – along with the Sudan – is one of the poorest and heavily-indebted countries in the world.
In addition to its involvement in the UNMISS mission, Germany also wishes to support food security and water provision in South Sudan –
the Federal Government committed funding totalling 19.5 million euros for this during intergovernmental negotiations with South Sudan.
Click here for more information on the current situation in the Sudan and South Sudan as well as German support.
The previous round of negotiations was held in Geneva in early November at Foreign Minister level.
However, some points remained unresolved. Work has continued on those issues.
Ashton is being assisted in the negotiations with Iran by senior officials from the E3+3 countries.
Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle spoke to the newspaper “Die Welt” on 20 November, just ahead of the talks. He said that the last round of negotiations had shown that a diplomatic solution was possible.
National export controls
When it comes to arms exports, the German Government pursues a responsible and restrictive licensing policy.
Decisions on arms exports are taken after careful consideration of external, security and human rights aspects.
Federal Government export controls policy
The Federal Government’s Political Principles governing Arms Exports
EU Common Position defining common rules governing control of exports of military technology and equipment
Export control of small arms and their ammunition
The Federal Government Report on Military Equipment Exports
NBC reconnaissance vehicle in the Saudi desert
In contrast to the practice in a number of other countries, Germany does not treat arms exports as an instrument of foreign policy.
The German Government controls the export of dual-use goods with regard to their potential application in the conventional military sphere or for weapons of mass destruction.
It focuses here on striking a suitable balance between the freedom of foreign trade and the application of unavoidable restrictions.
The Political Principles of the German Government governing the Export of War Weapons and Other Military Equipment as valid from 19 January 2000 give special importance to the human rights criterion.
The human rights criterion is described in detail and its requirements precisely defined for the first time in the Political Principles.
Arms exports, that is exports of war weapons and other armaments, as well as dual-use goods (i.e. goods which can be used for both military and civilian purposes) intended to serve military purposes, will not be licensed if there is “sufficient reason” to suspect that the equipment concerned (weapons, ammunition, specially constructed vehicles, but also software) will be used for internal repression or for any other human rights violations.
The general human rights situation in the country of destination plays an important role in this assessment.
Under the War Weapons Control Act, the export of war weapons requires a licence, and such licences are not generally granted where third countries are concerned, unless in specific cases there are particular German foreign or security-policy interests which, mindful of Alliance interests, suggest that a licence should be granted in an exceptional instance.
Not only exports of war weapons but also exports of other armaments require a licence under the Foreign Trade and Payments Act.
The receiving state must maintain effective export controls so as to ensure that the goods remain within the country of final destination.
The Federal Government’s Political Principles governing Arms Exports (PDF, 24 KB)
The Common Position is outlined in greater detail under “International export controls”.
Council Common Position defining common rules governing control of exports of military technology and equipment (PDF, 55 KB)
Against the background of the small arms problem in the Third World, the existence of grey and black markets for arms and the increased need for counter-terrorism measures, the German Government’s arms control policy helps to ensure that small arms and their ammunition are handled responsibly.
The German Government has particularly strict national standards regarding the licensing of small arms exports, and advocates at international level both the responsible harmonisation of political guidelines on small arms exports and greater transparency in small arms transfers by means of more rigorous state reporting requirements.
In order to enhance the internal and external transparency of its own practices, the German Government compiles a country-by-country list detailing the value of small arms and their ammunition supplied as well as the actual number of items exported under each individual licence to so-called third countries outside the EU/NATO. The Federal Government has thus assumed a pioneering role within the European Union in making its small arms exports transparent.
In order to ensure that small arms are intended for a responsible end-use, licences issued for supplies to state end-users for export from or transit through Germany are single-transaction only.
The receiving state must submit a declaration on end-user to this effect.
Furthermore, in keeping with the Federal Government’s Political Principles governing Arms Exports (19 January 2000) and the EU Common Position defining common rules governing control of exports of military technology and equipment (8 December 2008), respect for human rights in the country of destination is a crucial factor in any decision on exports.
As before, new production lines for small arms in third countries outside NATO and the EU will no longer be authorised, and the export principle “new for old” will be applied wherever possible.
According to this principle, supply contracts are to stipulate that old arms have to be destroyed when new arms are supplied, thus preventing their resale.
In keeping with its Political Principles governing Arms Exports, the Federal Government presents an annual Report on Military Equipment Exports, which shows how Germany’s principles in this area were implemented in the previous calendar year and gives details of licences issued by the Federal Government for the export of war weapons and other armaments in line with legal provisions.
According to the 2012 report, the German Government issued single-transaction export licences for armaments worth a total of some 4.7 billion euros.
Exports of war weapons were down 26.3% from 2011.
War weapons exports still only account for an ever smaller percentage of total German exports, this year 0.09%.
Licences were issued only following a thorough examination of individual cases which sought in particular to ensure that German military equipment would not serve to violate human rights or to exacerbate crises.
Decisions relating to the issue of licences were based on the EU Common Position defining common rules governing control of exports of military technology and equipment and the Federal Government’s Political Principles governing Arms Exports dating from 2000 (see above).
The Federal Government Report on Military Equipment Exports in 2012 PDF | 1 MB
The new round of negotiations on the Iranian nuclear programme has begun in Geneva.
E3+3 negotiations with Iran in Geneva
Palais des Nations, Geneva:
The nuclear talks with Iran entered the next round yesterday (20 November) with a first meeting between EU High Representative Ashton and Foreign Minister Javad Zarif of Iran.
The E3+3 negotiators from the three EU states Germany, France and Britain, plus the US, Russia and China, hope that their talks with Iran will result in an initial phase of concrete confidence-building measures.
EU High Representative Ashton is being assisted in the talks in Geneva by senior officials from the E3+3 countries.
Before meeting Foreign Minister Zarif of Iran, Ashton had thus coordinated her position with the E3+3 representatives.
The first joint negotiations of the entire E3+3 group with Iran were held last night.
New momentum for the negotiations
Back then, EU High Representative Ashton managed, together with Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle and his US, British, French and Russian counterparts, and the Deputy Chinese Foreign Minister, to inject new momentum into the process.
Solution to nuclear conflict possible
Today (21 November), the EU High Representative again met in private with the Iranian Foreign Minister on behalf of the E3+3 countries to discuss possible solutions.
Federal Foreign Minister Westerwelle comments on current developments in Ukraine
Foreign Minister Westerwelle issued the following statement in Berlin today (21 November):
“The European Union has made Ukraine a far-reaching offer of close political and economic cooperation.
Our interest in good relations with Ukraine remains constant. Our offer of genuine partnership stands.
We would like to see a Ukraine which shares our values and journeys with us towards greater freedom and prosperity.
The ball is in Ukraine’s court.
It is Ukraine’s sovereign right to choose its own path freely.”
We have therefore identified key points by which we can measure Ukraine’s commitment to Europe.
It all depends, however, on whether the will is there in Kyiv to develop in a European direction.
German aid for the Philippines moves forward
Emergency aid measures provide safe water, food and medical care in areas affected by the catastrophe.
Bild: The German Red Cross delivers aid supplies to affected areas
The typhoon “Haiyan”, known as “Yolanda” in the Philippines, may have been the strongest typhoon ever recorded –
on 8 November it hit the south-eastern regions of the Philippines and left a trail of devastation in its wake.
Local infrastructure has been largely destroyed in the areas hit by the catastrophe, the people there have nothing.
Through Federal Foreign Office emergency aid measures, which are being implemented in conjunction with the Federal Agency for Technical Relief (THW) and the German Red Cross (DRK) amongst others, victims are receiving safe water, medical care and food.
Immediately after the typhoon hit, the Federal Government made the initial resources for humanitarian emergency aid available.
German and international aid organisations now have a total of 6.5 million euros at their disposal for their work.
In the affected areas any form of help is needed,
according to current United Nations estimates over 13 million people have been affected by the devastation, of which over five million are children.
The victims have nothing –
neither drinking water, food, medical care or a roof over their head to protect them from further storms.
The THW purifies drinking water
Bild: The THW provides drinking water
German aid organisations are in the country to provide urgently needed aid supplies –
on 14 November the first flight bringing aid from the Federal Agency for Technical Relief (THW) and German Red Cross (DRK) landed in the affected region of Cebu.
Its cargo: 70 tonnes of aid supplies including tents, cooking equipment, hygiene items and plastic sheeting to build temporary accommodation for people.
Moreover, two water purification systems for clean water and a laboratory for analysing water have been delivered.
As of yesterday (20 November), the THW has been able to use these to purify water on the heavily devastated island of Bantayan and thus provide safe water to the town of Santa Fé.
Bild: Medical care in Ormoc
The DRK is currently building a Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement base camp on the island of Samar with financial support from the Federal Foreign Office.
In addition to this German aid organisations are building emergency shelter and are helping with the reconstruction of water, sanitation and food provision for the affected population.
Food parcels and health clinics
Bild: Food parcels are distributed in Ormoc
Food is also being distributed in Ormoc on the island of Leyte –
here each family receives a plastic bag with rice, dried fish, sugar, coffee and soap.
The food parcels are being distributed to hard-hit families with help from non-governmental organisations.
For many people, this is the only assistance that they have received since the typhoon hit.
In the meantime, workers from the Order of St. John Accident Assistance have constructed a provisional medical station and are providing urgently needed medical care.
Bild: Five million children have been affected by the impact of the typhoon
The scale of the catastrophe is vast, clean-up activities and the reconstruction of utterly destroyed infrastructure will take a long time.
Through emergency aid measures in the country however, German aid organisations can contribute to temporarily alleviating the worst of peoples’ suffering and coordinating further assistance.
Germany has moreover pledged long-term assistance to the Philippines for the reconstruction of devastated areas.
Emergency aid for the Philippines increased (18 November 2013)
Humanitarian assistance provided by the Federal Foreign Office
Current travel advice for the Philippines
Elections to the Constituent Assembly in Nepal are an important step towards stability and development
The Federal Foreign Office Spokesperson today (22 November) issued the following statement in Berlin on the elections to a Constituent Assembly held in Nepal on 19 November:
We welcome the elections which have successfully taken place in Nepal for a new Constituent Assembly which will also take on the role of a parliament.
We congratulate the interim government, which has succeeded in ensuring a free and credible election.
This is an important step towards stability and economic development.
The particularly high turnout testifies to the Nepalese people’s firm commitment to democracy and the rule of law.
We urge the elected representatives to cooperate constructively to draw up a constitution which meets the expectations of the people.
Nepal and Germany enjoy especially friendly ties.
In the interest of stable, democratic development, we will continue to stand by Nepal’s side.
Visa regulations
Schengen visa application
EU nationals
EU nationals do not require a visa to enter the Federal Republic of Germany.
Non-EU nationals
Generally speaking, all other foreigners require a visa for stays in Germany.
You will find an overview on visa requirements here:
Table of countries whose citizens require/do not require visas to enter Germany
Bodies responsible for issuing visas
In principle, the Federal Foreign Office is not involved in decisions on individual visa applications,
nor does it have any knowledge of the status of individual applications being processed by the missions.
Ratione loci competence (local responsibility) for issuing the visa lies with the mission responsible for the area in which the applicant has his/her ordinary residence or domicile.
Ratione materiae competence (subject-matter responsibility) lies with the mission of the Schengen state in whose territory the sole or main destination is situated.
Visa fees
Exemptions may be possible. Please refer to our fees page for information:
Visa fees (PDF, 51 KB)
Time required to process a visa application
As a rule, missions require between two and ten working days to decide on an application for a short stay visa.
Applications for visas entitling the holder to a longer stay or to take up gainful employment may take several months to process.
During the peak travel season there may be a waiting period for making an application to a German mission.
Persons requiring a visa to enter Germany should therefore submit their applications in good time.
agreement in nuclear talks Foreign Minister Westerwelle calls the agreement reached in Geneva a “turning point”.
Breakthrough in the negotiation process which has lasted for years:
the E3+3 negotiators from the three EU states Germany, France and Britain, plus the US, Russia and China, agreed on an interim deal with Iran on Sunday night (24 November) after four days of negotiations.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle called the agreement with Iran a “turning point”.
“We have taken a major step towards our goal of preventing a nuclear-armed Iran”, Westerwelle continued.
Mutual trust and swift progress in negotiations were now needed –
after a decade of negotiations that also saw standstills and confrontation, we have reached political agreement on the initial important steps for the first time today.
We need to use the upcoming months to build mutual trust.
It is vital for the agreements to be implemented in a transparent and verifiable manner and for the negotiations to make swift progress towards a comprehensive solution.
We are ready to do this and expect the same from the Iranian leadership.
Building trust
EU High Representative Catherine Ashton in talks with Iran’s Foreign Minister Zarif
The talks which began on 20 November were the third round of negotiations with Iran within a period of five weeks.
The aim of the E3+3 group was to work with Iran to find a way to enter an initial phase of concrete trust-building steps.
The EU High Representative Catherine Ashton and the Iranian Foreign Minister Javad Zarif were assisted in this endeavour by senior officials from the E3+3 countries.
Following signs of progress in the talks, at the weekend the E3+3 Foreign Ministers had travelled to Geneva in order to take part in the negotiations in person.
Joint statement from EU High Representative Ashton and Iranian Foreign Minister Zarif (PDF, 71 KB)
Application procedure
As a rule, applicants must submit visa applications, together with all necessary documents, in person at the German mission responsible for their place of residence.
In order to avoid time-consuming requests for additional information or documentation, applicants should consult the website of the respective mission well in advance of their departure date to find out about the visa procedure and about the documentation which has to be submitted.
Visa application forms can be obtained from the mission free of charge (in the local language).
Applicants may also download the forms here (see right).
The forms submitted must be original versions in the appropriate language of the mission in question.
Application forms may also be downloaded free of charge from the website of the competent mission.
Requirements for the issue of short stay (Schengen) visas
The respective mission makes a decision on the visa application at its own discretion, taking into account all the circumstances in any given individual case.
There is no automatic entitlement to a Schengen visa.
The mission must ensure that the following requirements have been met in each individual case:
The purpose of the trip to Germany must be plausible and comprehensible.
The applicant must be in a position to finance his/her living and travel costs from his/her own funds or income.
The visa holder must be prepared to leave the Schengen area before the visa expires.
Documentary evidence must be provided of travel health insurance with a minimum coverage of 30,000 euros valid for the entire Schengen area.
This undertaking is normally to be made to the foreigners authority in the place of residence of the person making the undertaking.
Should a visa application be rejected, the applicant will be informed of the main reasons for the rejection.
Every applicant is entitled to take legal recourse against the mission’s decision.
Requirements for the issue of visas for longer stays and/or stays entitling the holder to take up gainful employment
As a rule, all foreigners require visas for stays of more than three months or stays leading to gainful employment.
Exemptions apply to EU and EEA (European Economic Area) citizens and Swiss nationals.
Furthermore, citizens of Australia, Canada, Israel, Japan, New Zealand, the Republic of Korea and the United States of America may obtain any residence permit that may be required after entering Germany.
Citizens of all other countries planning a longer stay in Germany must apply for visas at the competent mission before arriving in the country.
Such visa applications must be approved by the relevant foreigners authority in Germany,
i.e. the foreigners authority in the place where the applicant intends to take up residence.
If the approval of the foreigners authority is necessary before a visa can be issued, the procedure can take up to three months, in some cases longer, since the foreigners authority will often consult other authorities (e.g. the Federal Employment Agency).
Missions may only issue visas once they have obtained the approval of the foreigners authority.
Visas entitling holders to take up gainful employment often do not require the approval of the foreigners authority, which speeds up the application process.
Visa application forms for a long-term stay (longer than three months) can be obtained from the relevant mission free of charge.
They can also be downloaded here (German, English, French, Italian). The forms submitted must be original versions (at least two sets) in the appropriate language of the mission in question.
Please contact the mission beforehand to find out exactly which forms are required.
The foreigners authorities are also responsible for measures and decisions pertaining to residence law for foreigners already residing in Germany.
Foreigners authorities are not subordinate agencies of the Federal Foreign Office,
and the Federal Foreign Office cannot influence their decisions.
They are in fact accountable to and operate under the supervision of the respective interior ministries and senators of the Länder (federal states).
Simplifying the procedure for applying for Schengen visas
The possibility of downloading and filling in visa application forms online, and then taking the completed and printed out form to the interview at the visa section where they can be scanned in electronically via a barcode has done much to reduce the time required to process the application at the visa counter.
In addition, many German missions have introduced an electronic appointments system to help manage the number of visitors to the mission and thus shorten waiting times.
This option is of particular benefit to persons who have to travel frequently for professional or private reasons and have proven their reliability by using previous visa legally.
In future all missions will electronically scan in applicants’ fingerprints when accepting visa applications.
This biometric procedure will be introduced gradually region by region, probably by the end of 2014.
Once a person’s fingerprints have been scanned in, an interview at the mission will only be necessary in exceptional cases when submitting a visa application.
A renewed biometric procedure is envisaged after five years.
Statistics
Number of short stay Schengen visas (transit, visits, business, tourism, etc.) issued by German missions in 2012:
Number of national visas issued by German missions (usually for longer stays and stays leading to gainful employment) in 2012:
Principles
Number of visa applications rejected by German missions in writing in 2012:
Total number of visa applications processed by German missions in 2012:
Legal provisions relating to the issue of visas (selection)
Schengen Border Code Regulation (EC) No 562/2006 of 15 March 2006 establishing a Community Code on the rules governing the movement of persons across borders
Council Regulation (EC) No. 453/2003 of 6 March 2003 amending Regulation (EC) No 539/2001 listing the third countries whose nationals must be in possession of visas when crossing the external borders and those whose nationals are exempt from that requirement
Council Regulation (EC) No. 1932/2006 of 21 December 2006 amending Regulation (EC) No 539/2001 listing the third countries whose nationals must be in possession of visas when crossing the external borders and those whose nationals are exempt from that requirement
Council Regulation (EC) No. 1244/2009 of 30 November 2009 amending Regulation (EC) No 539/2001 listing the third countries whose nationals must be in possession of visas when crossing the external borders and those whose nationals are exempt from that requirement
Freedom of Movement Act/EU of 30 July 2004 (Federal Law Gazette I, No. 41, p. 1986)
Ordinance on the admission of foreigners for the purpose of taking up employment of 22 November 2004 (Federal Law Gazette I, No. 62, p. 2937)
D visa regulationRegulation (EU) No. 265/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 March 2010 amending the Convention Implementing the Schengen Agreement and Regulation (EC) No 562/2006 as regards movement of persons with a long-stay visa
The above-mentioned Federal Law Gazettes can be obtained from Verlag des Bundesgesetzblattes, Postfach 13 20, 53003 Bonn, Germany, and the Joint Ministerial Gazettes from Carl Heymanns Verlag KG, Gereonstrasse 18-32, 50670 Cologne, Germany, or through booksellers.
The Official Journal of the European Communities is available from the Office for Official Publications of the European Communities, L-2985 Luxembourg.
EU High Representative Ashton and Iranian Foreign Minister Zarif with the E3+3 Foreign Ministers
Bild: Iran negotiations:
Europe 2014
How can we shape the future of the European project?
A visa is not required for visits of up to 90 days in a 180-day period for nationals of those countries for which the European Community has abolished the visa requirement.
Under German law (section 71 (2) of the Residence Act), responsibility for issuing visas lies with the missions of the Federal Republic of Germany, i.e. its embassies and consulates-general.
Since 14 May 2008, the fee for all types of visas has been EUR 60.
Since 5 April 2010, Regulation (EC) No. 810/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 establishing a Community Code on Visas (Visa Code) forms the statutory basis under European law in all Schengen states for the issuing of visas for transit through the Schengen area or for short-term stays in the Schengen area not exceeding 90 days in any 180-day period.
The Visa Code standardises the visa requirements which must be examined by the mission in the course of the visa procedure.
Should an applicant be unable to prove that he/she can finance the journey and stay from his/her own funds, a third person may undertake to cover all costs associated with the trip in accordance with sections 66 and 68 of the Residence Act.
Persons whose entry into the Schengen area would jeopardise security or public order in the Schengen states or who do not fulfil one or more of the above-mentioned requirements, cannot be granted a visa.
As a result of Regulation 265/2010 it is now possible for anyone in possession of a national visa (D visa) and a valid travel document to move freely in the Schengen area up to three months in any six-month period.
The increasing number of visas issued which entitle holders to multiple short stays in the Schengen area over a long period of time means it is no longer necessary to submit visa applications repeatedly.
Convention Implementing the Schengen Agreement (Agreement of 14 June 1985 between the Governments of the States of the Benelux Economic Union, the Federal Republic of Germany and the French Republic on the Gradual Abolition of Checks at their Common Borders)
Visa Code Regulation (EC) 810/2009 of 13 July 2009
Residence Act of 30 July 2004 (Federal Law Gazette I, No. 41, p. 1952)
Ordinance Governing Residence of 25 November 2004 (Federal Law Gazette I, No. 62, p. 2945)
Council Regulation (EC) No. 539/2001 of 15 March 2001 listing the third countries whose nationals must be in possession of visas when crossing the external borders and those whose nationals are exempt from that requirement (Official Journal L 81/1 of 21 March 2001); Council Regulation (EC) No. 2414/2001 of 7 December 2001 amending Council Regulation (EC) No. 539/2001), in the respective current version
To read the Minister of State’s speech in its entirety, go to
During his speech at the Franco-German Institute in Ludwigsburg Minister of State Michael Link outlined key challenges facing the European Union in the coming months and called for greater “problem-solving skills”.
The Schengen Agreement
History and development of the Schengen Agreement
Map of the Schengen area
Its key points relate to measures designed to create, following the abolition of common border checks, a common area of security and justice.
Specifically it is concerned with
harmonising provisions relating to entry into and short stays in the Schengen area by non-EU citizens (uniform Schengen visa),
measures to combat cross-border drugs-related crime,
police cooperation, and
cooperation among Schengen states on judicial matters.
The European Community thereby assumed responsibility for large parts of the Schengen acquis (the Schengen Agreement and associated body of regulations) and its further development.
For EU member states there are considerable advantages in belonging to the Schengen area.
Since 1985, several other states have joined the Schengen area:
Italy signed the Agreement on 27 November 1990, Spain and Portugal both signed on 25 June 1991, Greece signed on 6 November 1992, Austria on 28 April 1995, and Denmark, Finland and Sweden, along with the non-EU member states Iceland and Norway, all signed the Schengen Agreement on 19 December 1996.
Switzerland, which is also not an EU member state, signed the Agreement in 2004.
The Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia all acceded to Schengen on 21 December 2007.
The newest member of the Schengen area is Liechtenstein (a non-EU country), which joined in 2011.
Key points of the Schengen acquis
Holders of such visas may also cross the Schengen area’s internal borders without undergoing identity checks.
Harmonised visa policies of Schengen countries (common list of third countries whose nationals require or do not require visas).
External border checks according to a common Schengen standard.
Access by all Schengen countries to the Schengen Information System (SIS), which provides data on persons and objects throughout the Schengen area especially in connection with inquiries by police and judicial authorities.
Close police and judicial cooperation.
Joint efforts to combat drug-related crime.
Schengen countries
The following is a list of countries which fully implement the Schengen acquis (so-called fully implementing countries), along with details of when border checks were or are due to be abolished:
Border checks abolished
Belgium, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia, Slovenia
12 December 2008 (land borders), 29 March 2009 (air frontiers)
Liechtenstein
Schengen Acquis (PDF, 8 MB)
Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom
Special arrangements have been made for the EU member states Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom.
While Denmark fully implements the Schengen acquis, it made a reservation on signing the Schengen Agreement regarding the implementation and application of future decisions taken under the Agreement.
It will decide on a case-by-case basis whether to participate in the further development of the acquis under international law and whether to incorporate Community law developed without its participation into its national law.
Denmark is, however, bound to implement certain measures relating to the common visa policy.
While Ireland and the United Kingdom are not parties to the Schengen Agreement,
they can, with the approval of the EU Council, apply the Schengen acquis in whole or in part and participate in its further development.
They do not issue Schengen visas
and apply the Schengen Agreement only in part.
Neither country, however, has abolished border checks.
Iceland and Norway
Although neither Iceland nor Norway are EU member states, both countries fully implement the Schengen acquis
Since then Iceland and Norway have been fully implementing countries.
In practice the non-EU members Iceland and Norway participate in Schengen-related work through mixed committees that meet parallel to EU Council working parties.
Their meetings are attended by representatives of the governments of EU member states, the Commission and third-country governments.
Iceland and Norway thus take part in discussions on the further development of the Schengen acquis but not in any votes taken in this connection.
Andorra and San Marino
While Andorra has not actually signed the Convention Implementing the Schengen Agreement,
it has no checks at its borders with neighbouring countries Spain and France.
San Marino has not signed the Convention Implementing the Schengen Agreement either, but has no checks at the border with its only neighbour, Italy.
Bulgaria, Romania, Cyprus and Croatia
and consequently do not issue Schengen visas.
Certain requirements still need to be met before the Schengen acquis can be fully implemented.
Only once these steps have been completed can the political decision on full implementation of the Agreement and the abolition of border checks be taken.
Selected legal provisions relating to the Schengen Agreement (excerpts)
asylum matters (determining in which member state an application for asylum may be submitted),
restore lost trust Foreign Minister Westerwelle received a delegation from the US Congress in Berlin.
The talks focused on how lost trust could be restored
Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle received a delegation from the US Congress in Berlin.
The talks focused on how the trust that has been lost within transatlantic relations can be restored.
Bild: Westerwelle meets US members of Congress Murphy and Meeks
In a series of talks in Berlin, Senator Chris Murphy and Congressman Gregory Meeks sought to establish new trust.
Meeks made it clear that the US did not take its relationship with Germany for granted.
It was a relationship that needed to be worked on.
Senator Murphy -  efforts to repair relations
Before the meeting with Foreign Minister Westerwelle, Senator Murphy, who is also Chairman of the Subcommittee on European Affairs in the US Senate, said that the efforts being made to repair relations could not stop at just words.
New ground rules had to be laid down on which both sides could work together to ensure that only as much surveillance is permitted as is needed to protect their countries.
clear rules for the future
At the start of the meeting, Foreign Minister Westerwelle declared that he was pleased to be able to welcome both members of Congress for this important and well-known reason.
The presence of both members of Congress is an expression of the transatlantic partnership and we therefore welcome this visit.
Trust has been lost.
We are working together to be able to restore this trust.
There are two main points of focus here -
transparency for what has happened in the past and at the same time clear rules for the future.
We want a healthy balance between the demands of security and those of privacy - that is the spirit in which these talks are taking place.
Alongside Foreign Minister Westerwelle both members of Congress also met with the Minister of the Interior, Hans-Peter Friedrich.
In addition to this talks in the German Bundestag were on the agenda.
Following their meetings in Berlin, Murphy and Meeks will travel on to Brussels where they will also be working to restore trust.
Spying on one's closest partners is unacceptable
On 14 June 1985 the Federal Republic of Germany, France, Belgium, Luxembourg and the Netherlands signed the Schengen Agreement on the gradual abolition of checks at their common borders. The Agreement is named after the small town in Luxembourg on the border to France and Germany where it was signed.
On 19 June 1990 the Convention Implementing the Schengen Agreement was signed.
The Convention Implementing the Schengen Agreement entered into force on 1 September 1993. Its provisions could not take practical effect, however, until the necessary technical and legal prerequisites such as data banks and the relevant data protection authorities were in place. The Convention thus took practical effect on 26 March 1995.
With the entry into force on 1 May 1999 of the Schengen Protocol to the Treaty of Amsterdam of 2 October 1997, Schengen cooperation – initially based only on an international agreement – was incorporated into EU law.
For EU citizens the abolition of checks at the Schengen area’s internal borders means not only greater freedom of movement but also greater security.
To compensate for the absence of checks at the Schengen area’s internal borders, better and more effective checks at its external borders have been introduced, as have other measures such as mobile border area patrols and improved police networking.
Some EU member states – Bulgaria, Cyprus, Romania and Croatia – are not yet full members of the Schengen area; border checks are still conducted between these countries and the Schengen area (see below for the position with regard to the United Kingdom and Ireland).
Citizens of Schengen countries (see below) can cross the Schengen area’s internal borders without undergoing identity checks.
Third-country nationals with a national residence permit issued by a Schengen country may, for the duration of its validity, travel for up to 90 days per 180-day period to any other Schengen country. This also applies to holders of a national visa (category “D” visa) issued by a Schengen country.
Rules determining competence for asylum procedures, now replaced by Council Regulation (EC) No. 343/2003 of 18 February 2003 (so-called Dublin II Regulation).
Following the complete abolition of internal border controls anyone holding a uniform Schengen visa may enter any other fully implementing country for up to 90 days per six-month period for the duration of the visa’s validity.
on the basis of the Association Agreement they concluded with the EU on 18 May 1999.
They both belong (together with Denmark, Finland and Sweden) to the Nordic Passport Union, which has abolished checks on its members’ common borders.
On 1 December 2000 the EU Council decided that the Schengen acquis should take effect in all five countries belonging to the Nordic Passport Union.
The regulations relating to the Schengen Information System SIS have been in force since 1 January 2000.
Relations between Iceland and Norway on the one hand and Ireland and the United Kingdom on the other with regard to those areas of the Schengen acquis that apply to Iceland and Norway are governed by an agreement approved by the EU Council on 28 June 1999.
Although they are EU member states, Bulgaria and Romania (accession on 1 January 2007), Cyprus (accession on 1 May 2004) and Croatia (accession on 1 July 2013) implement the Schengen acquis only in part
These include the introduction of the second-generation Schengen Information System (SIS II) and the successful conclusion of evaluations determining that the requirements for full implementation have in fact been met.
Agreement of 14 June 1985 between the Governments of the States of the Benelux Economic Union, the Federal Republic of Germany and the French Republic on the Gradual Abolition of Checks at their Common Borders: Joint Ministerial Gazette
1986, p. 79 ff.
Convention of 19 June 1990 Implementing the Schengen Agreement of 14 June 1985 between the Governments of the States of the Benelux Economic Union, the Federal Republic of Germany and the French Republic on the Gradual Abolition of Checks at their Common Borders (Convention Implementing the Schengen Agreement): Federal Law Gazette II 1993, p. 1013 ff.
Act of 15 July 1993 on the Schengen Agreement of 19 June 1990 on the Gradual Abolition of Checks at the Common Borders: Federal Law Gazette II 1993, p. 1010 ff.
Notification of 20 April 1994 of the Entry into Force of the Convention of 14 June 1985 Implementing the Schengen Agreement of 14 June 1985 between the Governments of the States of the Benelux Economic Union, the Federal Republic of Germany and the French Republic on the Gradual Abolition of Checks at their Common Borders (Convention Implementing the Schengen Agreement): Federal Law Gazette II 1994, p. 631 ff.
Treaty of Amsterdam of 2 October 1997: Federal Law Gazette II 1998, p. 386.
Schengen Borders Code (Regulation (EC) No. 562/2006 of 15 March 2006), in effect since 13 October 2006.
Berlin Foreign Policy Forum
On 26 November representatives from the fields of politics, academia, business and the media convened for the Third Berlin Foreign Policy Forum.
International audience at the Berlin Foreign Policy Forum
On 26 November representatives from the fields of politics, academia, business and the media convened for the Third Berlin Foreign Policy Forum to discuss central issues of German foreign policy.
The Berlin Foreign Policy Forum, which is being held for the third time this year, takes stock of German foreign policy and asks crucial questions about the direction it should be taking.
What future does the transatlantic partnership have in light of the eavesdropping scandal?
How can the conflict in Syria be resolved?
Is a coherent European foreign and security policy possible?
And what is Germany’s role in Europe?
Participants and speakers attempt to shed light on these questions in numerous panels and discussion groups.
Minister of State Link opened the Berlin Foreign Policy Forum
He pointed out that, while the EU was due to meet with the countries of the Eastern Partnership in Vilnius in a few days’ time, the Loya Jirga in Kabul had just taken important decisions on international involvement in Afghanistan.
Meanwhile, at the weekend the E3+3 states had concluded an arrangement with Iran on its nuclear programme which signified a crucial turning point after almost ten years of tough negotiations.
He emphasised that German diplomacy was playing a significant role in all these issues.
German and European diplomacy
Minister of State Link went on to say:
This year we have seen what European diplomacy is capable of achieving with the High Representative at the helm in the Western Balkans and in Iran.
These undeniable success stories of European diplomacy ought to encourage us.
The establishment of the European External Action Service is not only in this connection an achievement that is unparalleled in the world.
Now our task is to strengthen the European External Action Service and the High Representative so that they can continue to promote European interests and values effectively in future.
After all, Europe will have to assume greater responsibility in foreign policy, especially in our immediate neighbourhood.
saying that it was taking place at a time of significant worldwide course-plotting and constituted an important discussion platform.
“A time of worldwide course-plotting”
At the same time, he stressed that Germany could not go it alone in the area of foreign policy.
Only by joining forces can Europe effectively promote its values and goals in the world.
High-ranking participants in this year’s Forum include the former Saudi Arabian Head of Intelligence and Ambassador Al Faisal, Federal Defence Minister de Maizière, former US Security Advisor Brzezinski and the Chancellor’s Foreign Policy and Security Advisor Heusgen.
Close partnership between Germany and Poland Foreign Minister Westerwelle and his Polish counterpart Sikorski underlined Ukraine’s European perspective at German-Polish consultations in Warsaw
Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle met the Polish Foreign Minister Radoslaw Sikorski in Warsaw on 26 November for German-Polish consultations.
At the beginning of his visit, the Polish President Bonislaw Komorowski paid tribute to the German Foreign Minister for his contribution to the German-Polish friendship.
Ukraine’s European perspective
Bild: Foreign Minister Westerwelle with his Polish counterpart Sikorski
The Foreign Ministers’ German-Polish consultations in Warsaw focused on preparations for the Eastern Partnership Summit as well as the latest developments in Ukraine.
Following their meeting, Foreign Minister Westerwelle and his Polish counterpart Sikorski issued a joint statement, highlighting that Germany and Poland remain committed to Ukraine’s European future.
The statement issued by both Foreign Ministers moreover noted that the peaceful demonstrations in Kyiv and other Ukrainian cities were a strong signal that citizens in Ukraine are longing for closer ties between the EU and Ukraine.
Both Ministers stated the following:
We share that wish and stand firm in our commitment to the people of Ukraine who would have been – and still can be – the main beneficiaries of the EU’s unprecedented offer of close political and economic cooperation.
Moreover, in the German-Polish statement, both Ministers highlighted that the offer of an ambitious association agreement is still on the table.
Nevertheless, Kyiv needed the “political will” for “tangible progress” in meeting the conditions set out by the European Union in December 2012.
Contribution to German-Polish friendship
Bild: President Komorowski congratulates Foreign Minister Westerwelle on receiving the Polish Order of Merit
Right at the beginning of his visit to Warsaw, the Polish President Komorowski awarded the German Foreign Minister the Knight Commander’s Cross of the Order of Merit for his contribution to German-Polish friendship.
At the official ceremony, President Komorowski emphasised that German-Polish relations had developed outstandingly well.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle said that he was honoured and moved and gave his heartfelt thanks for the esteemed award.
The reunification of Germany had also been the reunification of Europe.
Without the desire for freedom shown by the Polish people, European history would not have unfolded as auspiciously.
Honouring the Holocaust survivor Turski
Bild: Foreign Minister Westerwelle awards Marian Turski the Commander’s Cross
During his visit, Foreign Minister Westerwelle also awarded the Holocaust survivor Marian Turski the Commander’s Cross of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany at the German Ambassador’s residence in Warsaw.
Turski has worked for reconciliation and dialogue both in the Society of the Jewish Historical Institute and in the International Auschwitz Committee.
It was also largely thanks to his initiative that the Museum of the History of Polish Jews, which is supported by Germany, was established.
In the speech he gave when presenting the award, Foreign Minister Westerwelle paid tribute to Turski’s great personal engagement as an important actor and driving force within tripartite Polish-German-Jewish relations.
Externer Link, öffnet in neuem FensterGerman-Polish statement on Ukraine
Externer Link, öffnet in neuem FensterPoland Country Profile
In his opening speech Minister of State Michael Link praised the timing of this year’s Forum,
In his opening speech Minister of State Link drew attention to the crucial timing of the Forum.
The Berlin Foreign Policy Forum is organised by the Körber-Stiftung in collaboration with the Federal Foreign Office.
A current list of participants and panel hosts, the full programme of the event and additional information on the Forum can be found at: www.forum-aussenpolitik.de.
Container ship
The framework conditions for an open world trading system are created through multilateral negotiations and agreements to ensure German companies fair and equal access to markets all over the world.
For the work of the Federal Foreign Office this means: successful foreign policy creates the conditions for successful foreign trade relations.
The German system is characterised by a division of responsibilities between the state and business.
To give German companies the best possible support, the network of German missions abroad works closely with the German Chambers of Commerce Abroad and the correspondents of Germany Trade & Invest.
This especially applies to small and medium-sized enterprises.
For Germany, economic issues also involve research and technology to a high degree.
Only through top-quality research, constant technological innovation and state-of-the-art production can Germany hope to hold its own in global markets in future.
The peaceful use of nuclear energy, aerospace, high-speed transport, information and communications technology, transport and tourism policy, or energy, climate and environment policy:
Directorate-General for Economic Affairs
Germany is one of the leading industrial countries and at the same time one of the world’s major exporters.
More than one in four euros is earned by exporting goods and services and over one in five jobs depends on foreign trade.
One of the Federal Foreign Office’s most important tasks is to ease the way for German businesses to get into foreign markets.
Germany’s exporters need a stable and predictable international situation and the best possible relations with global trade partners.
Success in foreign trade depends not least on effective trade promotion.
In this context, the German embassies and consulates ensure worldwide coordination, maintain contacts with authorities in the host countries, commit themselves to improving market access for German firms and, where necessary, assist them directly.
in all these fields the Federal Foreign Office is active in maintaining and intensifying foreign relations, the basis for cooperation between German and foreign companies.
Players and partners in the promotion of foreign trade and investment
Germany’s system of foreign trade and investment promotion involves Government and business alike.
Germany’s missions abroad (embassies and consulates),
the German Chambers of Commerce Abroad, Delegate Offices and Representations of German Industry and Commerce, and
Three pillars for the promotion of foreign trade and investment
form the three pillars of Germany’s external economic promotion.
All three are present in the world’s key export markets.
Human rights apply both on and offline
Teaserbild: The headquarters of the United Nations in New York
On 26 November the UN Human Rights Committee adopted a resolution tabled by Germany and Brazil on protecting online privacy.
German-Brazilian resolution on internet privacy adopted
On 26 November the United Nations (UN) Human Rights Committee adopted a German-Brazilian resolution on protecting online privacy.
By doing so, the UN has for the first time reaffirmed the basic principle that human rights apply just as much online as they do offline.
The resolution will still have to be formally adopted by the UN General Assembly in December.
Bild: Peter Wittig, Germany’s Permanent Representative to the United Nations
Germany’s Permanent Representative to the UN, Ambassador Peter Wittig, declared his satisfaction with the vote, saying:
The text also made it clear that “unlawful and arbitrary surveillance” could infringe the rights to privacy and freedom of expression.
Equal rights on and offline
Bild: The United Nations headquarters in New York
The resolution initiated by Germany and Brazil requires UN member states to verify whether the surveillance they carry out respects human rights.
Moreover, it highlights the possible ways in which intelligence services’ spy programmes can breach the law in other countries.
Over the course of negotiations over the text, some states had initially taken the stance that international law only obliged them to protect the privacy of citizens of their own territory.
Data protection is still on the agenda
Moreover, the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights is tasked with drafting a report on the surveillance programmes of intelligence services and privacy protection.
This report should then be discussed in detail in the General Assembly and Human Rights Council in Geneva next autumn.
Germany and Brazil have thus succeeded in securing a place for the topics of data protection and online privacy on the UN agenda for the foreseeable future.
German-Brazilian resolution on the protection of privacy (German) (PDF, 33 KB)
German-Brazilian resolution on the protection of privacy (PDF, 276 KB)
Ambassador Wittig’s statement on the adoption of the German-Brazilian draft resolution at the Third Committee of the UN General Assembly on 26 November 2013 (PDF, 73 KB)
Germany in the United Nations
Within the Federal Government, the Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology is the lead ministry for the promotion of foreign trade and investment.
Other players involved in the promotion of foreign trade and investment include:
the Federal Länder (federal states),
German Chambers of Commerce Abroad, Delegate Offices and Representations of German Industry and Commerce
Chambers of Commerce Abroad are the official missions of German industry abroad.
They are voluntary groupings of companies from Germany and a partner country based in the latter.
More information is available at www.ahk.de
Under the service “DEinternational“, the Chambers of Commerce Abroad offer (for a fee) a broad range of globally comparable basic services as well as country-specific specialist services.
They thus assist German companies based both in Germany and abroad with seeking concrete business opportunities and carrying out business.
If there is adequate demand, the Chambers of Commerce Abroad will bundle services for clients in several countries or regions.
More informationen is available at www.deinternational.de
The Federal Foreign Office and the missions abroad
also in the economic sphere.
Promoting German economic interests is a priority task for the missions abroad.
There is always at least one contact person for foreign trade and investment issues.
Companies can either approach the missions directly with a request for assistance or contact the Federal Foreign Office in Berlin.
Chambers of Commerce Abroad are recognised by the German Association of Chambers of Industry and Commerce.
They lobby in the interests of businesses from both Germany and the partner country and promote commercial activity in both directions.
One of their most important tasks is to promote foreign trade and investment for members and non-members alike. This is why they receive funding from the Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology.
In some countries where the market economy is only just being developed or where Chambers of Commerce Abroad have yet to be set up, the German Association of Chambers of Industry and Commerce has set up Delegate Offices and Representations of German Industry and Commerce in order to promote foreign trade and investment.
Its services range from information on requests for tender, assessments of business sectors, country reports and market analyses to information on import rules and practical tips for business.
In keeping with its new mandate, the society has expanded its areas of activity.
It now covers foreign trade, market observation, attracting investors, marketing and communication, as well as the cross-sectoral areas New Federal Länder and cooperation with the Chambers of Commerce Abroad.
It also assists foreign companies interested in investing in Germany.
GTAI falls within the responsibility of the Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology (BMWi).
Germany Trade & Invest mbH (GTAI)
And all around the world, the German missions abroad are available to help and support businesses.
The Federation and Länder, associations and societies supporting business
the regional initiatives of German business (contact via the Federation of German Industries - www.bdi.de)
the country associations (associations of businesses and institutions: German-African Business Association, Ibero-America Association, German Near and Middle East Association, Eastern and Central Europe Association, German Asia-Pacific Business Association, Australia and New Zealand Association, and
the German Chambers of Industry and Commerce — “German Centres” in Delhi, Gurgaon, Jakarta, Mexico City, Beijing, Shanghai, Singapore and soon also in Moscow and Dubai.
More than 70 organisations support German firms in conducting their business with foreign clients.
The German business portal iXPOS helps them find the right contacts and the right information to keep on top of their affairs.
The most important task of Germany’s more than 220 embassies and consulates-general is to represent German interests in the host country,
The missions abroad advise German companies and help them establish contacts; they support companies in dealings with government agencies to which they have particularly good access given their status; and they work to improve general market access.
German Chambers of Commerce Abroad have a membership of some 50,000 companies worldwide, of which approximately 80% are abroad.
The German Chambers of Commerce Abroad are present at 120 sites in 80 countries.
Germany Trade & Invest (GTAI)
Germany Trade & Invest provides all sorts of business information, thus making it easier for German companies to get involved in international markets.
The GTAI was created on 1 January 2009 as the successor to both the German Office for Foreign Trade (bfai) and Invest in Germany, a society responsible for attracting foreign investors.
Germany Trade & Invest provides exporting companies in Germany with the information they need on different markets and sectors, projects/calls for tender, laws and customs regulations, in printed form, through online databases and in response to direct questions.
Germany Trade & Invest has a useful website, publishes various newsletters on specific issues and sectors and also runs iXPOS, the German business portal.
When it comes to attracting investors, GTAI makes good use of its expertise in acquiring and advising foreign investors.
It assists potential investors with finding a possible location in Germany or selecting a specific site and establishes contacts with the Federal Länder agencies which promote business and trade.
The Federation is the sole stakeholder in Germany Trade & Invest.
Today we are marking Human Rights Day.
Human rights are universal.
They are valid equally for all and are indivisible.
A few weeks ago, Viet Nam signed the Convention against Torture and was elected to the UN Human Rights Council.
In signing the Convention, Viet Nam is making clear that as part of the international community it wants to commit to ensuring respect for human rights.
There is no doubt that Viet Nam has achieved a great deal in realising social and economic rights; scarcely any other country has been so successful in recent years in tackling poverty or building schools and hospitals.
Regrettably, however, there are people in detention in this country because they voiced their opinion in public.
Viet Nam must guarantee unrestricted freedom of opinion, of the press and of assembly and release without delay all those who are in prison because they spoke their mind.
There is no room for the death penalty in the 21st century!
Human Rights Day is marked on 10 December and is the day on which we celebrate the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which was adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on 10 December 1948.
The European Union and its member states assume that there are several dozen political prisoners being held in Viet Nam, the majority of them because they exercised their right to freedom of opinion and assembly.
These experts can only undertake a field mission to a state at that country's invitation.
The practice of many states is to extend a standing invitation to all experts.
Viet Nam has issued no such standing invitation to date.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle congratulates the United Arab Emirates on the 2020 Expo in Dubai
In Berlin today (28 November), Foreign Minister Westerwelle issued the following statement on Dubai being chosen to host the 2020 World Expo:
I congratulate the United Arab Emirates on winning the bid to host the 2020 World Expo in Dubai.
For the very first time an Arab country has been chosen, not least in recognition of
the breath-taking pace of development in the United Arab Emirates.
Dubai has literally become a global hub and is now a large, modern and cosmopolitan metropolis.
I wish the United Arab Emirates all the best and great success in the preparations which it must now undertake.
Dubai managed to defeat Yekaterinburg in the third round of voting at the International Exhibitions Bureau (BIE) in Paris, winning 116 of the164 votes.
The other candidates, São Paulo and Izmir were already out of the running.
Homosexuality and religion in sub-Saharan Africa
Participants at the Pride & Prejudice Conference in Berlin
When human rights collide
In societies with traditional religious beliefs, this often leads to discrimination and violence.
Decriminalisation and social change
Caught between homosexuality and religion
The activists have come from countries including Ghana, Cameroon, Malawi, Nigeria and South Africa - countries where LGBTI rights are dealt with in widely differing ways.
The participants from Cameroon, Ghana and Nigeria reported on their work with people who are serving long prison sentences due to their sexual identity.
Decriminalisation is an important goal of their activities in civil society, as is removing the associated taboos.
In contrast, LGBTI rights are enshrined in the constitution in South Africa - but these rights on paper have little to do with reality, as the South African activist told us.
Creating space for dialogue
They said that in their home countries this direct contact was often not possible - although religion plays such a crucial role in many African societies.
"We can't get access to our politicians, they don't talk to us - but they do talk to you!"
The German Bundestag (parliament) agrees to extend German participation in the peace missions in the Sudan and South Sudan
The German Bundestag has agreed by a large majority to Germany's continued participation in the UN peace missions UNAMID and UNMISS in the Sudan and South Sudan.
On 28 November, the German Bundestag agreed by a large majority to Germany's continued participation in the UN peace missions UNAMID and UNMISS in the Sudan and South Sudan.
Improving the security situation in Darfur and consolidating freedom in South Sudan comprise both missions' key tasks.
Germany will be involved in the two United Nations (UN) missions in the Sudan and South Sudan for a further year.
The Bundestag has extended both mandates for the deployment of the Bundeswehr (German armed forces) in South Sudan (UNMISS) and in the Sudanese province of Darfur (UNAMID) to 31 December 2014.
Up to 50 German soldiers are working on each mission.
These were the words used by a South African activist to sum up the reasons for her work and for travelling to Germany to this event.
Although the right to free sexual orientation is a human right, homosexuality is a criminal offence in many countries around the globe.
According to Helmut Metzner, a member of the board of the Hirschfeld-Eddy Foundation, the right to sexual orientation faces the additional problem that it often collides with the right of freedom of religion.
In Metzner's opinion, the two rights are part of the indivisible catalogue of human rights and they should not be compromised, either singly or jointly.
"Believers should honour God, not play God.
As Pope Francis so nicely put it:
Who are they to judge others for their sexual orientation?"
Otherwise the laws get ahead of society, and that inevitably results in setbacks.
We have to fight for decriminalisation and at the same time win people's hearts and minds!"
This seminar in Germany is important in the eyes of the activists above all because they can enter into an open dialogue with the churches here.
The international community could create a space for dialogue and bring people together, suggested a Rwandan participant.
In addition, he said, German politicians and human rights activists were in a position to talk directly to African politicians whenever they came on visits to Germany.
In this way the international community could contribute to the protection of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex people in Africa.
Ultimately the balancing act between homosexuality and religion always requires a great deal of sensitivity - in Germany as in sub-Saharan Africa.
For more information on the German Government's support for the human right to sexual orientation click here
A conference entitled "Pride & Prejudice" was held in the Federal Foreign Office on 28 November. It provided an opportunity for LGBTI activists from Africa to meet religious representatives and human rights policy-makers.
“We're here because we want to enter into dialogue and we want to question traditional ideas in our societies.”
She and 11 other LGBTI activists have come to Berlin for a week in order to debate the difficult relationship between homosexuality and religion in Africa.
The activists from sub-Saharan Africa campaign for lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersexual rights in their home countries.
The international term for the people concerned is “lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons”, or LGBTIs.
The 12 African participants came to Berlin at the invitation of the Hirschfeld-Eddy Foundation and the Federal Foreign Office in order to discuss the issues with religious representatives as well as human rights and development policy specialists.
"Focusing on decriminalisation is dangerous if people's views remain unchanged.
Human Rights Commissioner calls for moratorium on the death penalty
As the number of people being executed in Iran continues to rise, Markus Löning, the Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy at the Federal Foreign Office, issued the following statement today (29 November 2013):
I am aghast at the current spate of executions taking place in Iran.
More than 400 people have been executed since the start of the year.
This is in stark contrast to his stated intention of fighting for progress to be made in the field of human rights.
I am particularly shocked by the fact that the executions often take the form of public hangings, which result in a painful death by asphyxiation.
I thus call on all those in positions of responsibility in Iran to suspend the execution of all current death sentences with immediate effect, to adopt a moratorium and thereby to become part of the international abolitionist movement.
According to the information available to the Federal Foreign Office, more than 400 people have already been executed this year (by comparison, the figure for 2012 was 370).
The real figure is probably much higher.
According to the current report by Dr Ahmed Shaheed, the UN Special Rapporteur on Iran, there has been a huge rise in the number of executions since the presidential elections in June 2013.
By ratifying the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, Iran has committed itself to using the death penalty only for the most serious crimes and to upholding certain minimum standards, such as the prohibition of particularly cruel methods of execution and the exemption from capital punishment of anyone who was underage at the time of the offence.
And even since President Rouhani took office in August 2013, some 200 death sentences have been carried out.
I am dismayed that the death sentence is still being imposed on people who were minors at the time they committed their offences.
From Budapest to Berlin:
Hungarian scholarship-holders in Germany’s public administration
Foreign Minister Westerwelle at the Security Council
In September and October 2013, 16 young civil servants from Hungary spent some time getting to know the day-to-day work of Germany’s administrative bodies.
The work was determined in particular by the radical changes in the Arab world and by crises on the African continent.
Momentous changes in the Arab world
Tibor Schaffhauser was in the Federal Foreign Office Directorate-General for Culture and Communication, where he concentrated on the German minority in Hungary.
Tibor Schaffhauser worked in the Federal Foreign Office Directorate-General for Culture and Communication, where he concentrated on the German minority in Hungary.
Developments in that part of the world dominated the work of the Security Council again and again over subsequent months.
Looking into the UN Security Council (file photo)
Hungarian scholarship-holders visiting Germany
Do we need reforms?
For example, the Security Council responded quickly to the violence in Libya, adopting Resolution 1970 on 26 February 2011.
How can citizens become more involved in EU decision-making processes?
Germany supported the decision to refer the situation in Libya to the International Criminal Court for criminal enquiry.
This visit by scholarship-holders takes place every year as part of USÖV, the public administration’s Hungarian scholarship programme.
This year’s scholarship-holders worked in several bodies, including the Federal Foreign Office, the Ministry of the Interior and the Federal Network Agency for Electricity, Gas, Telecommunications, Post and Railway.
All of them speak very good German – a prerequisite for participation in the programme.
The Security Council is the only body in the United Nations that can take decisions binding under international law. It bears primary responsibility for maintaining international peace and security.
It is composed of ten non-permanent members and five permanent members (the United States, France, the United Kingdom, China and Russia).
European Year of Citizens
Continuing crisis in Syria
A network that spans borders
The dramatic situation in Syria (Homs, 9 July)
Tibor Schaffhauser (25) usually works at the Hungarian Ministry of Public Administration and Justice.
But the Council is still struggling even now to agree on a united stance in relation to the Syrian regime.
Under this motto, in 2013 the focus is on the individual rights of people in the EU.
This includes active involvement in the political opinion-forming process at European level.
He learned German during a school exchange in Baden-Württemberg and as an Erasmus student in Berlin.
“What’s more, I come from Siófok, a holiday destination on Lake Balaton; there are plenty of German tourists to talk to there,” he explains.
China and Russia have thrice used their veto powers to block draft resolutions, most recently on 19 July 2012.
Schaffhauser also used his time at the Federal Foreign Office to look at the German language in Hungary.
The European Union has declared 2013 the European Year of Citizens.
Europe’s fundamental values such as freedom, democracy and the rule of law do not just apply to the EU member states. Each EU citizen is guaranteed individual freedoms and rights under the EU treaties.
One of his tasks was to organise a session of the German-Hungarian standing intergovernmental committee for the promotion of the German-speaking minority in Hungary.
Germany had joined with its partners in seeking a clear resolution on Syria and supported the draft which provided for non-military sanctions under Article 41 of the UN Charter.
Trouble spot Africa
That meant I was working with former colleagues, teachers and other people I knew,” he says.
Support from German colleagues
Federal President Joachim Gauck said in his speech on Europe on 22 February 2013:
Traditionally the Security Council deals particularly often with events on the African continent.
“For me, more Europe means more European civil society.”
A new state
Trouble spots in Africa were frequently on the agenda again in 2011 and 2012.
Tibor Schaffhauser (left) and his colleagues from the FFO Directorate-General for Culture and Communication
The scholarship programme allowed him to spend two months getting a taste of the Directorate-General for Culture and Communication at the Federal Foreign Office.
One focus in 2011 in particular was developments in Sudan and the independence of South Sudan, which was and still is closely followed by the Federal Government.
Tibor Schaffhauser is positive about the administrative bodies’ openness and commends the hospitality he found in Germany:
“I was accepted and made part of the team very well, despite coming from a different state within Europe and a different administrative system.”
Benefits at the personal and professional levels – that is the point of a scholarship programme like this one.
“During my stay abroad, I gained a lot of positive impressions, established many contacts and even found new friends,” Tibor Schaffhauser says.
He hopes to be able to make good use of his new ties to Germany once he is back in Budapest – and not just in his dealings with the German minority in Hungary.
Since the USÖV programme started in 2011, around a fifth of its nearly 500 participants have been able to gain experience abroad in Germany’s public administration.
Following a coup in March 2012 this West African country descended into severe crisis; large parts of the north of the country are now under the control of Islamist groups.
The Security Council is currently looking into how it can comply with the request from ECOWAS, the AU and Mali to approve and support an international military mission.
Special German priorities
A child soldier in Uganda
Germany also used its two-year membership to highlight its own thematic priorities, for instance as chair of the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
Every EU citizen is able to influence policy-making at European level – by voting in elections, participating in Citizens’ Forums and taking part in public consultations on pieces of EU legislation.
Only in this way, with the participation of the citizens, will European integration continue to be a success story.
For the first time the Security Council adopted a presidential statement on this matter, recognising security-policy implications of climate change.
1 December has been used to raise awareness of the AIDS pandemic for 25 years.
The Security Council agreed on a presidential statement calling among other things for cooperation between the UN and the Arab League to be intensified.
Germany’s membership of the Security Council 2011/2012
Although the last few decades have seen pivotal successes in the fight against HIV and AIDS, many challenges remain.
During its term on the Security Council Germany also assumed the lead on the Afghanistan dossier, taking on a coordinating role on all issues relating to Afghanistan.
It also chaired the Al Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee.
In Germany, the “Positiv zusammen leben” campaign (a play on ‘being positive’) is calling for solidarity with those who have HIV or AIDS.
Positiv zusammen leben
An AIDS ribbon
The UN organisation UNAIDS points out that the number of people being newly infected with HIV has fallen by 33% since 2001. An even greater reduction, of 52%, has been recorded among children born to HIV-positive women, who are often infected during childbirth or through the mother’s milk.
During the same period, access to anti-retroviral drugs has risen to 40 times what it was.
This, for example, is in part due to the fact they now cost around 100 times less than they did in the 1990s.
Access to medication saves lives:
deaths caused by AIDS have been reduced by nearly 30% since 2005 alone.
Rates of infection down, discrimination still high
Nonetheless, there are still many countries in the world in which it is very difficult to access anti-retroviral drugs.
Young adults are often the victims, their deaths leaving behind grandparents and children.
Sexual violence adds to the risk of HIV infection.
Globally, around 50 young women are infected with HIV every hour, in many cases through sexual acts imposed against their will.
While on the one hand the rate of HIV infection and the numbers dying of AIDS are falling, the worldwide fight against HIV and AIDS is hampered by stigmatisation and discrimination against people with AIDS and violence against women and girls.
Among other causes, Germany supports the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria (GFATM), which funds national measures to combat the three diseases and is intended to strengthen healthcare systems in developing countries.
He focused mostly on Germany’s cultural and media relations with the countries of Central and Eastern Europe.
“My work was made a lot easier by the fact that I had already performed similar duties in my ministry in Hungary.
More information about the German Government’s Global Health Policy is available here.
Network European Movement Germany:
You can also find plenty of up-to-date information on the Year of Citizens on Twitter at @NetzwerkEBD and under the hashtag #eyc2013.
Raising awareness of citizens’ rights
With its wide range of events, the Year of Citizens 2013 is intended to spotlight the rights of private citizens in Europe and to remind people of these rights.
The concept of EU citizenship was introduced 20 years ago in the Maastricht Treaty.
Other rights and powers, such as the European Citizens’ Initiative, are less well known. These will be well publicised during the year.
Federal Chancellor Willy Brandt and UN Secretary-General Kurt Waldheim in New York on 26 September 1973
Information on the European Citizens’ Initiative
For many years, UN membership for the two German states was inconceivable.
You can find further information and events connected with the European Year of Citizens at europa.eu.
World AIDS Day: Being positive
Around the world, 34 million people are living with HIV/AIDS – roughly equivalent to the total populations of Bavaria, Baden-Württemberg and North Rhine-Westphalia put together.
During the EU Citizens’ Dialogue in Bonn on 28 November Members of the European Parliament and representatives of the EU Commission and the Federal Government fielded questions from the floor.
EU Citizens’ Dialogue:
Two German flags in front of the UN headquarters (September 1973)
For example, 27 UN organisations are now located in Germany.
The country is the third-largest financial contributor to the UN budget and provides personnel for a host of UN bodies, institutions and peace missions.
Furthermore, Germany has been elected five times as a non-permanent member of the UN Security Council.
Together with its G4 partners Brazil, India and Japan, Germany is committed to comprehensive reform of the UN Security Council and in this context is itself a candidate for a permanent seat.
For Germany, the UN is the central institution for effective multilateralism.
On 26 September 1973, Willy Brandt became the first German head of government to address the UN General Assembly, saying
“[We have come] to assume a share in the responsibility for world affairs on the basis of our convictions and within the framework of our possibilities.”
A look back:
Two years on the UN Security Council
Germany was a non-permanent member of the Security Council for two years (2011‑2012). During that time, it was active on the whole range of issues dealt with by the Security Council.
When Germany became a non-permanent member of the Security Council on 1 January 2011, the radical changes in the Arab world – the so-called Arab Spring – had just got underway.
In addition, an arms embargo was imposed on Libya. Travel restrictions were imposed on members of the Libyan leadership and their assets were frozen.
Resolution 1973 dated 17 March 2011 allowed the Security Council to take “all necessary measures” and set up a no-fly zone to protect civilians at risk of attack.
Germany abstained in the vote on this second resolution on Libya, because it did not want to intervene in the crisis with military means.
Following the fall of the Gaddafi regime and as a result of the escalating violence in Syria, the Security Council’s work was increasingly concerned with the situation there.
80% of the nearly 100,000 “blue helmets” serving with UN missions are deployed in Africa and over 60% of Security Council meetings are concerned with conflicts there.
In July 2011, the Security Council, under the German presidency, recommended that South Sudan, which had attained independence just a few days previously, should become the 193rd member of the United Nations.
DR Congo and Mali
MONUSCO blue helmets in the DR Congo
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is another recurring item on the Security Council’s agenda.
MONUSCO is the biggest UN blue helmet mission worldwide,
involving around 19,000 soldiers and police officers.
Mali became more of a focus of the Security Council’s work in 2012.
The Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) agreed in November to deploy support troops.
Under Foreign Minister Westerwelle’s leadership, the Security Council adopted Resolution 1998 (2011) in July 2011 and Resolution 2068 (2012) in September 2012 with the aim of expanding and strengthening protection for children in armed conflicts.
In July 2011, at Germany’s initiative, the Security Council also looked at the impact of climate change on peace and security.
During its presidency of the Security Council in September 2012, Germany proposed a debate on peace and security in the Middle East.
The presidency of the Security Council rotates monthly.
Germany held it twice, in July 2011 and September 2012.
This was Germany’s fifth time as a non-permanent member of the Security Council.
Even after the close of its term at the end of 2012 Germany will, as the third-largest contributor to the United
Nations and as a member of numerous UN bodies, continue to play an active part in the Organisation’s work.
Forty years later, this still holds true for Germany’s UN policy.
Forty years of UN membership:
“Membership of the UN Human Rights Council is both a huge opportunity and a huge responsibility for Viet Nam.
The United Nations from A to Z (PDF, 2 MB, in German)
Viet Nam has ratified numerous international human rights agreements, including the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
United Nations Association of Germany (PDF, 1 MB)
I also appeal to Viet Nam to suspend the execution of all death sentences and to abolish capital punishment altogether.
Viet Nam should also demonstrate its commitment at the beginning of its membership of the Human Rights Council by issuing a standing invitation to all UN Special Rapporteurs.
For Germany and many other Human Rights Council member states, it goes without saying that all UN Special Rapporteurs should be able to gather their own impressions of the situation in a country at any time.
This time the subject under discussion will be “Europe in the world”.
Another event focusing on “The EU and data protection” is scheduled for 20 February.
The Working Group on Arbitrary Detention established by the UN Human Rights Council ascertained in a specific case in 2012 that Viet Nam was holding three people in arbitrary detention and called for their immediate release (A/HRC/WGAD/2012/42). None of the three has as yet been released from prison or awarded compensation.
Unofficial estimates put the number of people on death row in Viet Nam somewhere between 500 and 600.
The idea of the Citizens’ Dialogue is for Members of the European Parliament and representatives of the European Commission and the Federal Government to field citizens’ questions on European policy.
You can contact the Network European Movement Germany by phoning +49 30 / 30 36 20 180 or emailing eyc2013@netzwerk-ebd.de.
The United Nations has appointed various experts (special mechanism) who at its request look at specific human rights issues, e.g. the Special Rapporteur on the Promotion and Protection of the Right to Freedom of Opinion and Expression.
Since that time, many EU citizens’ rights have become a matter of course. Prime among these are the freedom to travel throughout Europe without border formalities, as well as the freedom to work or shop in other EU countries.
Their visits would help establish an objective picture of the human rights situation in Viet Nam.”
The Ambassador of the Federal Republic of Germany today (9 December 2013) issued the following statement to mark Human Rights Day:
They are set forth in international agreements and bodies such as the United Nations Human Rights Council are committed to ensuring that they are observed.
Throughout the year “Citizens’ Dialogues” have been taking place across Europe on a wide variety of issues.
Throughout Europe and at local level:
Citizens’ Dialogues and more
The Federal Government, together with the Representations of the European Commission and the European Parliament in Germany, has issued an invitation to the next Citizens’ Dialogue on 30 January 2014 in Hamburg.
Text Humayun film:
In response to the intensive efforts by two countries, the UN General Assembly finally put an end to this diplomatic isolation on 18 September 1973 and decided to accept the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic as the United Nations’ 133rd and 134th full members.
Germany in the United Nations - Published by:
40 years as a member of the UN
The Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic (GDR) joined the United Nations (UN) on 18 September 1973.
Celebration at the Federal Foreign Office 18 September 2013
Yet only a few hundred metres away hard work is still going on.
His guide was the Project Director of the Aga Kahn Foundation, which restored Humayun’s Tomb.
German-Hungarian Forum
This year's annual conference of the German-Hungarian Forum took place at the Federal Foreign Office on 28 and 29 November.
Around 150 experts from the fields of politics, business, academia and the media took part in the event.
The Institute for European Politics organised the 23rd annual conference of the Forum in cooperation with the German-Hungarian Chamber of Industry and Commerce, the Hungarian Embassy in Berlin and the Federal Foreign Office.
Bild: MEP Brok (right) speaking to the former Hungarian Minister of Foreign Affairs, Balázs
Enhancing bilateral relations was the focus of the German-Hungarian Forum, which drew high-level participants.
In addition to this, through a series of panel discussions and working groups, topics such as the “Future of the European Union” were addressed from both a German and Hungarian perspective.
The Forum also focused on what role regional cooperation will play in Europe's future.
In a closing plenary on 29 September, both co-presidents of the Forum, the German MEP Elmar Brok and the former Hungarian Minister of Foreign Affairs Peter Balázs, summed up the work carried out in the Forum entitled “Europe as a vision and community of shared values”.
Youth Forum discusses the right to self-determination with regard to online activities
Bild: Peter Schoof, Director for Relations with EU Member States, gives a message of greeting on behalf of the Federal Foreign Office
In parallel, the “German-Hungarian Youth Forum” took place, chaired by Manuel Sarazzin, a Member of the German Bundestag, and Funda Tekin from the Institute for European Politics.
The young participants' discussions also focused on European topics, namely Europe's values, ways to overcome the crisis and youth unemployment, as well as the European Neighbourhood Policy.
Afterwards Foreign Minister Westerwelle also visited Humayun’s Tomb.
A further topic dealt with by the Youth Forum's young participants from Germany and Hungary was the challenges posed by the digital world and right to decide what information one shares with Facebook and the NSA.
EU Commissioner Oettinger - the Danube region has great potential
Bild: EU Commissioner Oettinger at the German-Hungarian Forum in the Federal Foreign Office
In his closing speech, EU Commissioner Oettinger spoke of how important Hungary had been to German reunification.
Oettinger noted that Hungary had been the first country to be able to break through the “Iron Curtain” which had divided Europe since the Second World War.
Germany was grateful for the country's courage, he continued.
In his speech, Oettinger pointed out that the European Union had been founded on the Rhine, as, with the exception of Italy, all six founding countries - such as Germany, France or the Netherlands - were connected by the Rhine.
And today the Danube marked the path of European integration.
Given their location on the Danube, it was an important task for both Germany and Hungary to work together to boost development in this region which stretches all the way to the Black Sea.
The first German-Hungarian Forum had been organised at the initiative of European movements in Hungary and Germany, and with the support of both countries' governments it took place in Budapest in June 1991.
The bilateral talks serve to promote the exchange of ideas and experience between high-ranking representatives and experts from politics, business, culture, academia, as well as grass roots initiatives in Germany and Hungary.
Key discussion points are how to shape business, social and foreign policy in both countries and their participation in the European integration process.
Hungary Country Profile
It is the tomb of the 2nd Mughal Emperor Humayun, who died in 1556.
The tomb is regarded as an architectural forerunner of the Taj Mahal.
There are more than one hundred Mughal graves here, and even more curious visitors.
Humayun’s Tomb attracts a particularly high number of visitors.
Yet the German Embassy is eager to preserve cultural heritage in New Delhi in a wider context.
Humayun’s Tomb, newly restored, is one of the most famous attractions for visitors to New Delhi.
A gateway is being restored, the 16th century Arab ki Serai.
The restoration work is being financed by the German Embassy in New Delhi, which has provided almost 60,000 euros from Cultural Preservation Programme funds.
The gateway is 14 metres high, adorned with red sandstone and white marble.
In mid-November, Foreign Minister Westerwelle came to see for himself how the work was progressing.
According to Foundation Director Ratish Nanda, the men and women on the building site still have several weeks of work ahead of them before the restoration of the Arab ki Serai, which is more than 300 years old, will finally be complete.
Humayun’s widow oversaw its initial construction, now the Tomb is one of the UNESCO World Cultural Heritage sites.
It has made available a total of almost 185,000 euros for this purpose since 2011.
Developing relations with Tanzania
On 2 December Federal Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle met his Tanzanian counterpart Bernard K. Membe for political talks at Villa Borsig in Berlin-Tegel.
The talks between the two ministers focused on developing bilateral relations and on regional issues.
Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE Treaty)
The CFE Treaty of 1990 is the cornerstone treaty on conventional arms control in Europe.
It limits the number of heavy conventional weapon systems in Europe, provides for the regular exchange of military information and offers the possibility of mutual verification.
Conventional arms control
The Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE Treaty) was concluded by the members of NATO and the Warsaw Pact in 1990 and entered into force in 1992.
It was intended to create a secure and stable balance of conventional armed forces at lower levels and to eliminate their capability to launch surprise attacks or large-scale offensives in Europe.
To this end, the Treaty limits the number of heavy conventional weapon systems (tanks, armoured combat vehicles, artillery systems, combat aircraft and attack helicopters). It also fosters mutual trust by having states notify one another in detail of their relevant holdings and host on-site inspections so that notifications can be verified.
Greater transparency and enhanced cooperation between the armed forces also increased mutual trust.
All in all, the CFE Treaty played a major part in ending the arms build-up in Europe and reducing military tensions in the turbulent years following the end of the Cold War.
The Adapted CFE Treaty (A-CFE)
The current situation
The German Government continues to regard conventional arms control in Europe as a crucial and indispensable part of any cooperative European security architecture.
The CFE Treaty of 1990, which all CFE States Parties except Russia are currently implementing, still serves to enhance dependability, stability and mutual trust in Europe.
That said, the German Government does consider the present situation less than satisfactory.
Its position is that conventional arms control in Europe needs to be rethought to focus less on stocks of military equipment than on transparency with regard to current military capacities. This would help dismantle remaining distrust and make any military developments easier to predict.
This approach is also intended to assist regional stabilisation and reintegrate Russia.
the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights in Warsaw External link, opens in new window(http://www.osce.org/odihr)
Bild: Federal Chancellor Merkel at the OSCE summit
From the CSCE to the OSCE
The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe was preceded by the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE), which adopted the Helsinki Final Act at its Summit in 1975.
The official change of name from CSCE to OSCE became effective on 1 January 1995.
With its 57 members, the OSCE is the only security policy organisation in which all European countries, the successor states of the Soviet Union, the United States, Canada and Mongolia are represented (Mongolia became the 57th member on 20 June 2012).
1. the politico-military dimension,
2. the economic and environmental dimension, and
3. the human dimension.
In the 2010 Astana declaration, the OSCE participating states also made it clear that human rights and democracy are “matters of direct and legitimate concern to all participating states and do not belong exclusively to the internal affairs of the state concerned.”
All 57 OSCE member states enjoy equal status. Decisions are taken by consensus and are politically, but not legally binding.
The OSCE is especially well-known to the general public for its independent election observation missions by the ODIHR, the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights.
Documents and other up-to-date information can be accessed on the OSCE website.
The Centre for OSCE Research (CORE) of the Institute for Peace Research and Security Policy at the University of Hamburg, which is supported by the Federal Foreign Office, can provide more comprehensive information on the OSCE.
Centre for OSCE Research (CORE), Hamburg
Organs, institutions and instruments
The OSCE’s decision-making bodies are the Summits of Heads of State and Government (most recently in 2010), the Ministerial Council which meets once a year, the Permanent Council in Vienna composed of participating States’ Permanent Representatives to the OSCE, which meets at least once a week, and the Forum for Security Co-operation (FSC), which meets once a week and has its own decision-making competence on politico-military issues.
The Chairman-in-Office (Ukraine in 2013) bears overall responsibility for executive action.
It is supported by the previous and succeeding chairs (Ireland in 2012, Switzerland in 2014), who together with the Chair-in-Office form the so-called Troika.
Bild: OSCE Secretary General Zannier (file photo)
The Secretary General (since July 2011 Ambassador Lamberto Zannier from Italy) supports the Chairperson-in-Office and heads the OSCE Secretariat, which has an international staff of about 175. The OSCE budget for 2013 is around 145 million euros.
The OSCE also has three independent institutions that monitor the political OSCE commitments and thus serve as an early warning mechanism.
They are:
the High Commissioner on National Minorities in The Hague External link, opens in new window(http://www.osce.org/hcnm)
and the OSCE representative on freedom of the media External link, opens in new window(http://www.osce.org/fom).
At the invitation of each host country, the OSCE is currently present in 15 participating states with field missions.
The goal of these field missions is to strengthen cooperation between the OSCE and the host governments and support the host countries in implementing OSCE commitments.
The CSCE’s traditional role as a forum for political consultation and negotiation has, due to many internal and inter-ethnic conflicts, gradually expanded in the last ten years to include new functions in the areas of early warning, conflict prevention and post-conflict peacebuilding.
The OSCE has developed a specific set of instruments for preventive diplomacy to enable it to perform these tasks.
German commitment to the OSCE
Germany is an active contributor of finance and personnel to the OSCE,
The German Government also provides substantial support in the form of addition voluntary contributions to OSCE projects in the entire OSCE region.
German staff are to be found in almost all the OSCE long-term missions and in OSCE institutions. All in all, Germany seconds around 40 experts.
Furthermore, Germany regularly contributes up to 15 percent – which is actually the limit prescribed by the OSCE – to the election observation missions run by the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR).
The Federal Republic of Germany is thus active on OSCE policy and promotes a strong OSCE with an eye to the future.
Germany considers civil society’s participation to be very important.
In order to strengthen the participation of academic institutions in security policy discussions, in 2011 Foreign Minister Westerwelle, together with is counterparts from France, Poland and Russia, announced the establishment of IDEAS: Initiative for the Development of a Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian Security Community.
Support for the initiative comes from academic institutions from the four participating countries. In October 2012 it published the report “Towards a Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian Security Community
From Vision to Reality”.
The IDEAS report (PDF, 1 MB)
External link, opens in new window Speech by Foreign Minister Westerwelle at the IDEAS inaugural event in Berlin on 20 March 2012
The Treaty on Open Skies
Joint Communiqué of 6 December 2011 from the four ministers (PDF, 6 KB)
In 2013, IDEAS was expanded by 19 further scientific institutes from different OSCE participating countries.
It is currently headed by Dr Wolfgang Zellner from the Centre for OSCE Research (CORE) in Hamburg.
The Treaty on Open Skies permits its States Parties to conduct observation flights unhindered,
in an area stretching from Vancouver to Vladivostok.
External link, opens in new windowwww.osce-network.net
The German Government attaches great importance to combating anti-Semitism as part of OSCE activities to promote tolerance and non-discrimination.
As well as implementing the results of the high-level Berlin OSCE Anti-Semitism Conference held in April 2004, known as the Berlin Declaration, the German Government provides support in terms of personnel and project financing for the Tolerance Unit in the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights.
Russian observation aircraft in the Czech Republic
From 2004 to 2008, Professor Gert Weisskirchen, Member of the German Bundestag, was the Personal Representative of the Chairperson-in-Office on Combating Anti-Semitism.
The Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) and the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly regularly conduct election observation missions in all OSCE participating states,
which all committed themselves to inviting international election observers in the 1990 Copenhagen Document.
Over the past ten years the ODIHR has conducted more than 150 election observation missions.
Monitoring elections is one of the more transparent ways to promote democracy and human rights.
OSCE’s election observation activity is based on two principles: on the one hand, monitoring clear government commitments to ensuring democratic elections, and on the other, no interference by the election observers in the voting process.
Election observation missions can last as long as two months and do not limit themselves to election day and vote counting, but rather also include election laws and electoral campaigns.
The Federal Republic of Germany usually provides up to 15 percent of the international election observers and regularly invites OSCE observers to monitor Bundestag elections.
The Treaty on Open Skies (OS)
Qualified potential observers can contact the Center for International Peace Operations (External link, opens in new windowwww.zif-berlin.org) about the possibility of participating in OSCE election observation missions.
OSCE cooperation with other international organisations and third countries.
Cooperation with the United Nations
The OSCE is a regional arrangement in the sense of Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter.
Its 1992 Helsinki Summit provided a general mandate to conduct peacekeeping operations and the Istanbul Summit in 1999 confirmed this mandate.
However, no such activity has been carried out so far by the OSCE.
The OSCE also cooperates with other international organisations such as NATO and the EU.
From the EU’s point of view, the OSCE is a pillar of common security with a comprehensive approach (three dimensions).
EU Member States amount to a little more than half of the OSCE members and provide two-thirds of the OSCE’s financial contributions.
The EU supports the development of the OSCE acquis.
Cooperation takes place in conflict prevention, crisis management and post-conflict rehabilitation and dealing with regional conflicts (Transdniestria, Georgia, Nagorny Karabakh).
Some OSCE programmes are co-financed by the OSCE and the EU.
Cooperation partnerships
The OSCE conducts a structured dialogue with countries in the southern Mediterranean region (Algeria, Egypt, Israel, Morocco, Tunisia and Jordan) and with some Asian states (Japan, South Korea Thailand and Afghanistan) as well as Australia.
The exchange of views on cooperative security is promoted through annual conferences and seminars, and cooperation partners also take part in meetings of OSCE bodies.
Other cooperation activities are offered depending on the needs and interests of individual Cooperation Partners;
for example, the OSCE offers support to the democratic transformation following the “Arab Spring” in North Africa and is especially active in training border staff for Afghanistan’s security.
External link, opens in new window Forum for Security Co-operation
OSCE’s Asian Partners for Co-operation
OSCE’s Mediterranean Partners for Co-operation
Top of page
Arms Control
The OSCE is the anchor of conventional arms control and military transparency as well as confidence-building in Europe.
Its Forum for Security Co-operation, which meets weekly and holds annual Implementation Assessment Meetings, is responsible for monitoring compliance with the various OSCE instruments for arms control and confidence and security-building measures (CSBMs) as well as for the development of future concepts.
It consults on current security dialogue developments and negotiates and adopts politically binding decisions and documents aimed at strengthening security and stability throughout the OSCE area.
The OSCE also supports the implementation of the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE) and the Open Skies Treaty.
Among the key documents that are the subject of consultation and further development within the FSC are the Vienna Document of 2011 on confidence- and security-building measures, the Code of Conduct on politico-military aspects of security, the Document on Small Arms and Light Weapons and the Document on Stockpiles of Conventional Ammunition.
Furthermore, the arms control regime defined by the 1995 Dayton Peace Accords is implemented under the auspices of the OSCE.
Conventional arms control under OSCE auspices
The CFE Treaty was amended in 1996 to grant Russia and Ukraine greater room for manoeuvre in locating their conventional armed forces in specifically designated regions.
The Treaty on Open Skies (OS) was signed on 24 March 1992 by NATO’s members and the Warsaw Pact states, and entered into force as a legally binding document on 1 January 2002.
The Treaty applies in the territories of its now 34 States Parties, and covers an area from Vancouver to Vladivostok.
Each State Party has the right to conduct an agreed number of unhindered observation flights each year in the airspace of the other States Parties.
They may use sensors for photography, radar and, since 2006, infrared imagery, to observe the territories of the other States Parties from the air.
Since 2013, initial steps have been taken to introduce the use of digital sensors, which promise even better observation capabilities.
Individuals from both the observing and observed parties are involved in the conduct of the flights. This cooperation is an important additional factor that enhances confidence-building.
Thanks to this type of aerial observation, the OS Treaty plays a key role in improving military openness and transparency and thus contributes to stability and cooperative security.
The Treaty is furthermore intended to facilitate the monitoring of compliance with existing and future arms control agreements (in particular the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe and the Vienna Document).
The OS Treaty also expressly allows for aerial observation in other fields.
OS observation flights may thus also be used to obtain a picture of the situation in international crises, as well as for conflict prevention, crisis management in the OSCE area and environmental monitoring, even if no use is presently being made of these options.
A global treaty
In the course of its implementation the Treaty has proven its worth as an integral element in cooperative arms control in Europe, with the participation of the USA and Canada.
The operative implementation of the Treaty is monitored by the Vienna-based Open Skies Consultative Commission (OSCC), which was established under its provisions.
The Federal Republic of Germany chairs one of the OSCC’s six informal working groups and is represented at working level on the others.
Germany is actively involved in further developing this important cooperative arms-control treaty.
The one thousandth observation flight under the Open Skies regime was successfully flown in September 2013.
Germany was involved in 12% of all observation missions as a result of its international cooperation with other States Parties.
The Federal Republic of Germany has not had an observation aircraft of its own since its TU-154 aircraft crashed in 1997.
It thus cooperates with other States Parties in order to exercise its right to conduct observation flights.
Click here to download the text of the OS Treaty:
Vertrag über den Offenen Himmel (PDF, 249 KB)
Treaty on Open Skies (PDF, 228 KB)
The Bundeswehr Verification Centre (ZVBw) plans, coordinates and conducts all OS missions abroad involving Germany. It also guarantees the proper conduct of OS observation flights by other States Parties in German airspace, provides the necessary specialist personnel for these tasks and analyses the data obtained (aerial photos and videos).
The States Parties agreed on an Adapted CFE Treaty (A-CFE) in 1999, the intention being to bring the treaty in line with the changes in security-policy considerations.
However, the adapted treaty has yet to enter into force, because the vast majority of CFE States Parties consider ratification impossible while Russia has still to meet its voluntary commitment to completely withdraw its troops from Moldova and Georgia.
In December 2007, Russia ceased implementation of the CFE Treaty, citing the justification that the treaty currently in force no longer reflected Russian security needs.
In view of Russia’s continuing refusal to restart implementation of the CFE Treaty, the vast majority of the CFE States Parties for their part stopped implementing the treaty as it relates to Russia at the end of 2011.
All other CFE States Parties continue to implement the CFE Treaty in relations with one another.
Given the ongoing pro-European protests in Ukraine, Foreign Minister Westerwelle reiterated the EU's offer of an association agreement.
He departs today for bilateral talks in Kyiv.
The mass protests in Ukraine continue:
Since last weekend, tens of thousands of people have demonstrated for the conclusion of the EU association agreement by staging protest marches and blocking streets.
President Yanukovych unexpectedly refused to sign the agreement last week.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle spoke of a "commitment of hundreds of thousands of Ukrainians to the EU."
Despite a ban on demonstrations, more than one hundred thousand people assembled on Kyiv’s Independence Square on 1 December – the biggest demonstration since the so called Orange Revolution in 2004.
Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle spoke of an “impressive commitment” of Ukrainians to the European Union.
the hearts of the people of Ukraine beat for the European Union."
Westerwelle is therefore travelling to Kyiv today, in order to hold bilateral talks in Ukraine whilst in the country for the OSCE Ministerial Council.
On the sidelines of the NATO Foreign Ministers Meeting in Brussels Westerwelle stressed that he would also be holding bilateral talks whilst in Kyiv, from today, for the OSCE Ministerial Council.
The Foreign Minister further stated that:
This is a profoundly European matter that we are observing in Ukraine.
And Europe has to concern itself with this, for one of the matters under debate is Europe.
It is obvious that a major internal debate is under way in Ukraine.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle had previously reiterated Germany and the EU's readiness to sign an association agreement with Ukraine.
Our door remains open.
The German Foreign Minister called on the Ukrainian Government to guarantee freedom of demonstration and to protect the demonstrators.
Demonstrators send a clear message
In the German Government's view, the mass protests also send a clear message.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle last visited Ukraine on 10 and 11 October 2013, meeting government, opposition and civil society representatives.
The visit focused on the negotiations on the EU association agreement.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle on the situation in Ukraine (1 December 2013)
A profoundly European matter
This was, in his words, a "profoundly European matter".
It therefore continues to press actively for the comprehensive modernisation of conventional arms control in Europe and participates in the debate that has been launched.
That's why everybody should hear and understand the message that Ukraine wants a European orientation.
And we want this message, too, to be understood by all those involved in Ukraine."
The door to Europe is open
It was against this background that Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle arrived in the Ukrainian capital Kyiv on 4 December.
While there, the German Foreign Minister held talks on the latest developments in the country.
He also attended a Ministerial Council of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE).
Pro-European protests have continued in Ukraine for days now.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle and the two Ukrainian opposition leaders Klitschko (r.) and Yatsenyuk (l.) at a press conference in Kyiv.
At a joint press conference following their talks Westerwelle stated that he had come with a simple but clear message.
Westerwelle further assured his audience that the door to Europe remains open for Ukraine.
The German Foreign Minister then stated:
Westerwelle visits demonstrators at Independence Square
Foreign Minister Westerwelle with the Klitschko brothers at Independence Square in Kyiv
Following the talks, Foreign Minister Westerwelle went with Vitali Klitschko and his brother Wladimir, the heavyweight champion of the world, to Independence Square in the centre of Kyiv.
It was, he continued, obvious that a major internal debate was under way in Ukraine.
Mass protests for closer EU ties
Ukrainian hearts beat for Europe
Foreign Minister Westerwelle at Independence Square in Kyiv
In view of the massive demonstrations, Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle spoke of an “impressive commitment” by the Ukrainians to the European Union.
In the German Government's view, the mass protests send a clear message.
Given the ongoing pro-European protests in Ukraine, Foreign Minister Westerwelle took the opportunity whilst in Kyiv to reiterate the EU’s offer to conclude an association agreement with Ukraine.
Upon his arrival in Kyiv, Foreign Minister Westerwelle met with two Ukrainian opposition leaders, Vitali Klitschko and Arseniy Yatsenyuk.
The opposition’s main rallies have been held there for days now, calling for the association agreement to be concluded between Ukraine and the EU.
Before flying back from Kyiv, the Foreign Minister stated on 4 December on the sidelines of the  NATO Foreign Ministers Meeting in Brussels that it was a profoundly European matter that we were observing in Ukraine.
“Europe has to concern itself with this, for one of the matters under debate is Europe.”
Pro-European protests in front of the government building in Kyiv
Foreign Minister Westerwelle had previously reiterated Germany and the EU’s continued readiness to sign an association agreement with Ukraine.
Eastern Partnership
German-Ukrainian relations
Bild: Working closely with Afghans
Germany’s involvement in Afghanistan is broadbased, comprising both civilian and military components.
The northern part of the country is a particular focus.
The reconstruction effort in Afghanistan is aimed at securing lasting peace, economic stability and good governance.
This means it is important to advance development across the entire country and not just in the capital, Kabul.
Germany has taken on responsibility for securing and pushing forward reconstruction specifically in the northern part of the country.
Germany’s Provincial Reconstruction Teams
Press Information Officer, PRT Kunduz
As part of international efforts to support Afghanistan, Germany was responsible for two Provincial Reconstruction Teams (PRTs) operating in the northern provinces of Badakhshan and Kunduz under the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) mandate.
Once the Afghan security forces assumed responsibility for security in the PRT provinces, the PRTs too were placed under their responsibility.
German civilian assistance continues
Through its civilian engagement, Germany is supporting local reconstruction efforts by state and non-state entities.
The focus is on creating sustainable structures that will enable Afghanistan to stand on its own two feet.
For instance, Germany is assisting with the construction of hospitals, healthcare stations, schools, roads and police stations in the Balkh, Kunduz, Badakhshan and Takhar provinces.
German police advisers are also assisting with police capacity-building.
This is possible thanks to a host of organisations implementing the projects.
Projects in northern Afghanistan
Living in the crisis zone posting in Kabul
Our colleague Fabian Otten, assistant desk officer for politics, protocol and press in Kabul is helping to prepare the Afghan presidential elections which are set to take place next year.
2014 is the year in which Afghanistan's future will be determined -
over the next 12 months, the country will not only see the withdrawal of international combat troops but also presidential elections, which mark a defining moment for the Afghans.
Our colleague Fabian Otten (25 years old) reports on his daily life in Kabul, where the security situation is tense - and on the representatives of an active Afghan civil society group that he is supporting as they prepare the elections.
Bild: Armed vehicles at the airport in Kabul
The German public's view of Afghanistan is first and foremost shaped by the deployment of German soldiers.
The fact that many development workers are also here, along with one of the largest German embassies in the world, is often overlooked.
Moreover, Afghanistan is mostly associated with war and terror and considered by many to be a failed state.
My friends and family were thus concerned when I told them that in the summer I was going to move to the Hindu Kush for a year.
Daily life in a tense security situation
It is difficult to envisage life on posting in a crisis zone like Kabul in advance.
Every day brings a new reminder of the difficult security situation,
the town's landscape is dominated by high walls, barbed wire and the oppressive presence of security forces.
In some streets, the concrete walls are so imposing that you are reminded of when the Berlin Wall stood.
Bild: Fabian Otten (top left) with participants of an Afghan executive seminary for diplomats
In this environment I more or less move from one protected compound to another.
Journeys in armed vehicles, controls at numerous checkpoints on the way, vehicles checks with under vehicle search mirrors as well as searches by sniffer dogs trained to detect explosives are all part of daily life.
Working in a city like Kabul is a challenge.
Yet the exceptional circumstances mean there is an incredibly strong team spirit both in and beyond the Embassy.
Convivial evenings with colleagues or in other embassies offer at least some reprieve from the limitations imposed by the security situation.
Elections represent a defining moment
As international combat troops are due to withdraw in late 2014, many Afghans are concerned about the future.
Furthermore, presidential elections are scheduled to take place at the beginning of April.
Whilst elections in Germany are generally a calm event, here they represent a defining moment.
After his two terms in office, President Karzai cannot be elected again.
These elections offer the chance for this country to see the first peaceful transfer of power in decades, and so naturally they have aroused great interest within the population, as well as a desire to participate -
besides the existing election registers, a further over 3.1 million Afghans have signed up, despite threats from the Taliban and other rebel groups.
Bild: Shops in Kabul
I am pleased that through my daily work I am making a small contribution to enabling the elections to be a success.
As part of my work I cooperate with a local television station and those funding the election process to help run election awareness campaigns.
Moreover, we are assisting an Afghan non-governmental organisation in managing an independent election observation mission.
Working with Afghan journalists, I have been impressed by their high level of professionalism.
2014 is the year in which Afghanistan's future will be determined
Given the withdrawal of international combat troops and planned presidential elections, Afghanistan is at a crossroads.
Despite the many difficulties it faces, I am firmly convinced that the country is on the right track.
That is why I have decided to extend my time in Kabul by a further year, which will enable me to be here in person to experience 2014, the decisive year for Afghanistan, complete with the presidential elections and the withdrawal of combat troops.
As part of international efforts to support Afghanistan, Germany had two Provincial Reconstruction Teams (PRTs) operating in the north of the country under the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) mandate.
The goal is to help the Afghan population all over the country to achieve tangible improvements in their lives.
The northern part of the country is our main focus.
The PRT Feyzabad was handed over to the Afghan security forces on 9 October 2012, the PRT Kunduz on 6 October 2013.
Work on German development projects will continue, however.
Even though the PRTs have been disbanded, German civilian assistance is continuing at the same high level.
The German Consulate-General in Mazar-e-Sharif, which opened in June 2013, is crucial in coordinating our support.
Chairperson-in-Office, Secretary General, Colleagues, I would like to thank our Ukrainian hosts for inviting us to Kyiv and for the work they have carried out during their Chairmanship of the OSCE!
At the last OSCE summit in Astana we committed ourselves to the goal of a security community stretching from Vancouver to Vladivostok based on peace, freedom and prosperity.
A security community in which the US, the countries of Europe, their neighbours to the east, Russia and the countries of Central Asia could all find their place.
A security community in which each country could choose their own path without feeling pressured or coerced.
The atmosphere of threats and exercise of economic pressure that we have witnessed in this year are quite simply unacceptable.
The people in Ukraine want to be able to decide on their future themselves.
In the OSCE, we guarantee them the right to openly express their opinion in this regard.
I am greatly concerned by the latest events, particularly the use of violence against peaceful demonstrators in Kyiv last Saturday.
Ukraine currently holds the OSCE Chairmanship and is thus obliged to protect peaceful demonstrators from any form of intimidation and violence.
The reaction to the pro-European demonstrations will be indicative of the extent to which the Ukraine Chairmanship is committed to the common values anchored in the OSCE.
The Euro-Atlantic Security Community has not yet come into existence.
In 2015, we should use the 40th anniversary of the Helsinki Final Act as a chance to give a fresh impetus to the OSCE.
Even in recent years, we have not exploited the OSCE's potential enough.
This applies to solving the three territorial conflicts.
We need to refocus our efforts once again on finding solutions in Georgia, as well as to the Nagorno-Karabakh and Transdniestrian conflicts.
We need further progress in the fields of arms control and confidence- and security-building measures.
It is a good sign that we have agreed on an initial set of confidence-building measures in order to reduce the risks posed by new information and communications technologies.
This is the first agreement of its kind in the world.
The OSCE is thus adopting a pioneering role in the field of cyber security.
With all due respect to justified security interests, privacy protection must be given high priority.
When state actors spy in the internet age it is a serious violation of the right of individual privacy.
This is unacceptable.
The New York resolution on privacy protection, jointly initiated by Germany and Brazil, also serves as an important basis for the OSCE, particularly within the framework of its activities relating to the human dimension.
Since the Ministerial Councils in Vilnius and Dublin, no further progress has been made in the human dimension.
It is up to us here in Kyiv to use this opportunity to provide fresh impetus.
Germany will continue to work resolutely to strengthen the OSCE.
I wish Switzerland and Serbia all the best in planning their 2014/2015 Chairmanships.
Speech by Federal Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle at the 20th OSCE Ministerial Council in Kyiv
Two German nationals killed in Yemen
Foreign Minister Westerwelle issued the following statement in the Federal Foreign Office in Berlin last night (5 December):
“South Africa and the world have lost a great human being and an outstanding statesman.
These two Germans worked for the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) on development cooperation projects in Yemen.
A Yemeni co-worker was also killed in today's attacks.
I am devastated.
Our thoughts are also with the many other innocent victims of these attacks and their families at this difficult time.
Nelson Mandela’s political visions of peace and freedom, of the indomitable power of reconciliation and compassion, were and remain a source of hope and inspiration to people in Africa and throughout the world.
The German Government condemns these cowardly attacks in Sana'a in the strongest possible terms.
There can be no justification for these reprehensible crimes.
His name will always be associated with the peaceful transition from the iniquitous apartheid regime to democracy and the rule of law.
We are in close and constant contact with the Yemeni authorities and our European and international partners.
Nelson Mandela symbolises the fight against inequality and racism, the struggle to conquer hatred and, in short, to bring about a better world.
We share the grief of the families and friends of the deceased; to them we extend our deepest sympathy and condolences.
The Federal President writes:
We cannot allow Yemen to become a haven for terrorists.
He firmly believed that not only the oppressed but also the oppressors had to be liberated.
Germany will continue to work hard to ensure that this does not happen.
According to our information, a total of 52 people were killed in these attacks.
Federal President Joachim Gauck has sent Ms Graça Machel, Nelson Mandela’s widow, condolences on the death of her husband
On behalf of the whole German nation the Federal President has sent a message of condolence to Nelson Mandela’s widow, Ms Graça Machel, and the people of South Africa.
As a man and as a political leader, Nelson Mandela was a shining example of how hatred, violence and racism can be overcome.
Despite the humiliating experience of 27 years in prison, he found the courage and strength to lead his country to democracy on the path of non-violence.
An important part of this endeavour was the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, which was established at his initiative and has served as a model for many countries around the world.
That is Nelson Mandela’s legacy – and the mission he leaves to us all to complete.”
Nelson Mandela showed not only that the struggle for political freedom can be won by peaceful means, however. He also showed how important it is to use this freedom responsibly and ensure that it is preserved.
“We have come here as Europeans to our fellow Europeans.
Europe is not indifferent to Ukraine's fate.”
“We want Ukraine to be on board in Europe, because we believe that we belong together culturally, historically, and above all due to our values.
The EU’s offer and Germany’s offer are still on the table.”
Before flying back from Kyiv, the Foreign Minister stated on 4 December on the sidelines of the NATO Foreign Ministers Meeting in Brussels that it was a profoundly European matter that we were observing in Ukraine.
Safeguarding the right to demonstrate peacefully
During talks with Prime Minister Mykola Azarov on 5 December, Foreign Minister Westerwelle clearly stated that the right to demonstrate peacefully had to be protected.
After their talks, Westerwelle issued the following statement:
It was therefore also important, he said, to seek dialogue with the Government.
The mass protests in Kyiv and other Ukrainian cities were sparked by President Viktor Yanukovych’s unexpected refusal to sign the association agreement with the EU.
Since the weekend, tens of thousands of people have demonstrated for the conclusion of the agreement and closer ties between Ukraine and the EU by staging protest marches and blocking streets.
In Kyiv alone, more than 200,000 people assembled at Independence Square on 1 December – the biggest demonstration since the so called Orange Revolution in 2004.
“You can see from these demonstrations in the streets that
The German Foreign Minister called on the Ukrainian Government to guarantee freedom of demonstration and freedom of assembly.
“It is to be hoped that Ukrainian President Yanukovych gets this message,” Government Spokesman Steffen Seibert said.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle on the situation in Ukraine (1 December 2013)
Eastern Partnership
German-Ukrainian relations
It is my sad duty to inform you that two German nationals have lost their lives in terrorist attacks in the Yemeni capital of Sana'a.
We expect these brutal terrorist acts to be fully investigated as soon as possible and the people behind them brought to justice.
Nelson Mandela (1918-2013)
The world is in mourning.
After a long illness, Nobel Peace Prize laureate Nelson Mandela died on 5 December, aged 95.
South Africa’s President Jacob Zuma paid tribute to Mandela, describing him as the nation’s greatest son and father of the South African people.
UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon called him a “giant for justice”.
Nelson Mandela
“We are not taking sides with any given side, but are standing up for European values.“
On behalf of the German nation, Federal President Joachim Gauck has conveyed his condolences to Mandela’s widow, Graça Machel, and the people of South Africa.
The non-violent fight for democracy
Gauck said that the world had lost a great statesman in Nelson Mandela.
As a man and as a political leader, he went on, Nelson Mandela had provided a shining example of how hatred, violence and racism could be overcome.
Gauck paid tribute to the way Mandela, despite his time in prison, had found the courage and strength to lead his country to democracy on the path of non-violence.
Our obligation to Mandela’s legacy
Flags flying at half mast at the German Embassy in Pretoria
Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle also spoke in tribute to Mandela’s peaceful struggle against the apartheid system:
That is Nelson Mandela’s legacy – and the mission he leaves to us all,” the Federal President continued.
“His name will always be associated with the peaceful transition from the iniquitous apartheid regime to democracy and the rule of law.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle responds to news that Nelson Mandela has died (6 December 2013)
A shining example
Federal Chancellor Angela Merkel described Nelson Mandela’s message of reconciliation as “a shining example”:
“His political legacy of non-violence and rejection of any form of racism will remain an inspiration to people around the world for years to come.”
Nelson Mandela spent 27 years in prison for fighting the racist apartheid system, including a long term of incarceration on Robben Island off Cape Town.
In 1994, he became the first President of the democratic South Africa.
With his non-violent struggle for democracy, Mandela paved the way for reconciliation between blacks and whites in South Africa’s “rainbow nation”.
OSCE Ministerial meeting in Kyiv
Foreign Minister Westerwelle called on Ukraine, as current holder of the OSCE Chairmanship, to protect peaceful demonstrations from violence.
Bild: OSCE family photo
The OSCE's annual Ministerial Council began on 5 December in Kyiv.
The Foreign Ministers of the 57 OSCE participating states are attending in order to debate the topics of security, peace and conflict management.
Due to the latest developments in Ukraine, Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle travelled to Kyiv the day before in order to hold talks with both the government and opposition.
The Ukraine is holding the Chairmanship of the OSCE in 2013, and thus the country is hosting the 20th Ministerial Council in Kyiv on 5 and 6 December.
Amongst other things, the topics of cyber security and the safety of journalists are on the agenda in Kyiv.
In light of the pro-European mass demonstrations which have been taking place in Ukraine for days, this issue was also discussed.
Ukraine - how the demonstrators are treated is indicative of commitment to values
Bild: In talks with the Ukrainian PM Asarov
Foreign Minister Westerwelle had already arrived in the Ukrainian capital Kyiv on 4 December.
During his visit the German Foreign Minister held many talks with both the government and the opposition, in order to gain an impression of the situation in the Eastern European country.
More on Foreign Minister Westerwelle's talks with the government and opposition:
Ukraine - the door to Europe is open
When he addressed the OSCE Ministers, Westerwelle also spoke of the current pro-European demonstrations.
The Minister reminded Ukraine of its obligation, as current holder of the Chairmanship, to protect peaceful demonstrators from intimidation and violence.
He continued:
“The reaction to pro-European demonstrations will be indicative of the extent to which the Ukrainian Chairmanship is committed to the common values anchored in the OSCE”
The OSCE was a security community, Foreign Minister Westerwelle continued, in which each country could choose its own path - without feeling pressured or coerced.
“Helsinki+40” - providing fresh impetus
A further important topic at the Council in Kyiv was the so-called “Helsinki+40” process.
In 2015, the 40th anniversary of the Helsinki Final Act will be celebrated.
Bild: A view behind the scenes
In his speech, Foreign Minister Westerwelle said that the OSCE should view this as a chance to provide fresh impetus.
In recent years, all the organisation's potential had not been exploited enough.
Cyber Security - the OSCE's pioneering role
At the same time Foreign Minister Westerwelle acknowledged the agreement on cyber security reached in the OSCE, which contains an initial set of confidence-building measures in this field.
In this connection, Foreign Minister Westerwelle stated,
“this is the first agreement of its kind in the world. The OSCE is thus adopting a pioneering role in the field of cyber security.”
The agreement primarily includes measures on the exchange of information on national institutions and programmes in order to reduce the risks posed by new information and communications technology and to improve transparency amongst OSCE participating states.
Speech by Foreign Minister Westerwelle at the 20th OSCE Ministerial Council in Kyiv
The OSCE was created by the Helsinki Final Act of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) in 1975.
With its 57 participating states, it is the only security policy organisation in which all European countries, the successor states of the Soviet Union, the United States, Canada and Mongolia, the most recent state to join, are represented.
The OSCE sees the concept of comprehensive security as encompassing the following three dimensions: first, the politico-military dimension; second, the economic and environmental dimension; and third, the human dimension.
In this connection Michael Georg Link, Minister of State at the Federal Foreign Office, commented as follows:
It is a great success that today we were able to wrap up the negotiations on the Connecting Europe Facility.
This is an important instrument for generating growth in Europe.
The Connecting Europe Facility is a good example of how we are step by step giving concrete substance to Europe's Compact for Growth and Jobs.
Background information
Germany provides auditors for UN Industrial Development Organization
UNIDO conference in Lima (Peru)
The Regulation on the Connecting Europe Facility (CEF) was today adopted by the EU Council (Transport, Telecommunications and Energy).
The German Supreme Audit Institution can boast several decades of experience in auditing international organisations.
Greater planning security for German schools abroad
This marks a further important step towards implementing the German Schools Abroad Act, which will give the German schools abroad a legal claim to funding for several years.
Minister of State Pieper at the signing of the administrative agreement
Up until now, long-term planning was often something of a problem for German schools abroad. Only when the Budget Act was passed each year did they know how much funding they were going to get from the Federal Foreign Office.
Its responsibilities have included auditing the International Atomic Energy Agency and the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons as well as membership of the highly regarded United Nations Panel of External Auditors for many years.
From now on that is to change.
The resulting security is crucial for lasting improvements in the quality of the schools.
Minister of State Pieper talking to Deutsche Welle
Minister of State Pieper called the adoption of the German Schools Abroad Act and the signing of the administrative agreement a "historic moment".
"This means that in future all German schools abroad will enjoy legal certainty and planning security."
One key aim of the new regulation was to guarantee quality standards, she continued, as
“The German schools abroad are beacons of the German education system around the world."
Continuity and quality of teaching
In the medium term, the German Schools Abroad Act and the administrative agreement will not only ensure planning certainty for 142 German schools abroad.
They will also help improve the continuity and quality of teaching.
And the pupils stand to benefit most of all.
The German Schools Abroad Act passed by the Bundestag and Bundesrat will enter into force on 1 January 2014.
It creates a binding basis for the financing and supply of personnel to the German schools abroad.
For the first time, the schools will have planning certainty for three years; schools with stable numbers of pupils graduating will for the first time have a right to funding.
The additional administrative agreement between relevant partners in the Federation and Länder mainly sets out the procedure for seconding teachers to German schools abroad.
More information about German schools abroad
At the UNIDO General Conference in Lima (Peru) Germany was the clear winner, defeating several other candidates.
in which supervisory bodies such as the External Auditor have a significant role to play with regard to its practical implementation.
It provides also for innovative financial instruments such as European project bonds notably in the energy field, whose pilot phase will continue under CEF auspices.
The Federal Foreign Office was the German Government lead agency for the negotiations on the Connecting Europe Facility.
The Federal Foreign Office welcomes the election of the Bundesrechnungshof (German SAI) as the External Auditor for the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO).
By electing the German SAI, the 170 UNIDO member states have once again demonstrated their confidence in the institution, following its last term of office from 1994 to 2002.
The appointment of a new External Auditor at UNIDO comes during a process of critical reform,
More on Germany’s involvement in the United Nations
This is also the position adopted by Germany.
In the north of Albania
The European Union is supporting Albania as it forms closer ties with Europe.
Albania thereupon adopted a national action plan to implement these twelve key criteria.
In its Progress Report of October 2012, the European Commission recommended granting Albania candidate country status once it had implemented the necessary measures to reform the judiciary and public administration and to revise parliamentary procedures.
European Union General Affairs Council Conclusions on Enlargement and Stabilisation and Association Process, 11 December 2012 (PDF, 163 KB)
European support for reforms
IPA funds totalling 288.8 million euros have been earmarked for Albania for 2011 to 2013.
A sum of 98.12 million euros has been granted for 2013.
EU accession candidate:
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
In 2004, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia applied for EU membership; in December 2005, it was granted candidate country status by the European Council.
Milestones in relations between the EU and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
The European Commission first recommended that accession negotiations with the country be launched in its progress report of November 2009.
The country joined the UN under the designation “the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia”. Use of the name "Republic of Macedonia" is a matter of controversy between the Greek and Macedonian Governments.
In its progress report of October 2013, the EU Commission announced its intention to make a proposal on a negotiating framework for accession negotiations.
This framework is designed to ensure that the question of the country's name is resolved at an early stage of accession negotiations.
In addition, the screening process is to be launched early on in relation to the chapters "Judiciary and fundamental rights" and "Freedom and security".
This is intended to help ensure the sustainability of reforms.
Progress Report by the European Commission on the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 16 October 2013 (PDF, 725 KB)
These support public administration capacity-building in candidate countries by seconding experts from public institutions in EU member states on a long-term basis.
The German Government’s position
Germany is among the country’s most important trading partners and provides technical and financial support in various frameworks, including bilateral development cooperation.
These included issues such as ensuring the proper functioning of parliament and introducing appropriate parliamentary procedures, reforming electoral law, reforming public administration, strengthening the rule of law and fighting corruption and organised crime.
In this context, however, the European Commission requires Albania to continue its intensive efforts to fight corruption and organised crime.
European infrastructure instrument adopted
The EU Council of Ministers today (5 December) adopted the Connecting Europe Facility (CEF), an instrument for funding improvements to Europe’s transport, energy and digital networks.
Nearly 30 billion euros will be available over the next seven years for systematic improvements to Europe's cross-border infrastructure networks.
Our first priority will be to close the missing links along the trans-European transport corridors and build more interconnections between national energy networks.
This will make for better use of renewable energies and bring Europe’s economies and societies closer together.
This new facility for funding improvements to trans-European transport and energy networks as well as broadband services will be available as from 1 January 2014.
The CEF budget of 19.3 billion euros (in 2011 prices) was part and parcel of the agreement reached on the multiannual financial framework (MFR).
This will be topped up with an additional 10 billion euros from the Cohesion Fund, to be spent on transport infrastructure projects in the Cohesion countries.
With this new facility, the funding available for trans-European infrastructure projects during the current funding period ending in 2013 will thus be doubled.
The CEF Regulation adopted today sets out the parameters for allocating funding
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia applied for EU membership on 22 March 2004.
Recognizing the progress the country had made in implementing the Ohrid Framework Agreement and the Stabilisation and Association Agreement, the European Council granted it candidate country status at its meeting on 15/16 December 2005.
The Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU entered into force on 1 April 2004.
However, the Council has not yet voted on the matter, not least because a decision to open accession negotiations with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia might be vetoed due to the unresolved issue of its name.
Greece, which has a region called Macedonia, refuses to recognize this name.
Mediation efforts under the auspices of the United Nations are ongoing.
EU support for the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia on the path to accession
The IPA also enables the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to access EU-led twinning projects.
Germany and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia enjoy close and amicable political, economic and cultural relations.
Germany has consistently supported the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ever since the country attained independence in 1991.
Minister of State Link travels to New York
Minister of State Link comments on his New York talks about sustainable development, Syria and Mali
Michael Georg Link, Minister of State at the Federal Foreign Office, is travelling to New York today (Monday) for talks at the United Nations.
His agenda will include attending a session of the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals.
Bidding him farewell leaves us deeply moved and saddened.
We take our leave of Nelson Mandela.
Minister of State Link will also be talking to Hervé Ladsous, UN Under-Secretary-General for the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, about peace missions in Mali, the Sudan and South Sudan, as well as to Jeffrey Feltman, UN Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, whose remit includes preparing the Geneva II conference on Syria.
Other appointments include a meeting with Angela Kane, the UN Secretary-General’s High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, to talk about progress made on destroying Syria’s chemical weapons.
Everyone working for the cause of freedom, human rights and human dignity will find encouragement and inspiration in his life’s work.
Minister of State Link issued the following statement with reference to his coming round of talks:
We look back on a most remarkable life.
Developing the post-2015 agenda is one of the most important international processes of the decade; the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals is part of that process.
What an extraordinary man he was!
It is setting the parameters of sustainable development in all countries.
During my visit to New York, I hope to see good progress made in the working group and successful discussions on such key cross-cutting issues as human rights and good governance, which are fundamental to sustainable development.
Minister of State Link is Germany’s representative on the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals, which was established in Rio in 2012 and is to develop a report with proposals for the UN General Assembly by September 2014.
These proposals will feed into the international negotiations on the post-2015 development agenda.
In its current session, the Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals will be discussing such topics as human rights, good governance and the Global Partnership for Development.
The United Nations Millennium Development Goals constitute eight objectives formulated in 2001.
They cover, for example, eradicating extreme poverty and hunger, achieving universal primary education, promoting gender equality and ensuring environmental sustainability.
Their complete implementation is to be incorporated into the post-2015 agenda.
Despite the humiliating experience of 27 years in prison on Robben Island, he found the courage and strength to reject the path of hatred.
Nelson Mandela recognised that the oppressors, too, needed to be liberated.
The group develops proposals on what global sustainability goals to take the Millennium Development Goals forward after 2015 might look like.
Speech by Federal Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle on receiving the Grand Cross of the Order of Civil Merit (Gran Cruz de la Orden del Mérito Civil)
He firmly believed that “if people can learn to hate, they can also be taught to love, for love comes to human hearts much more naturally than its opposite”.
His legacy encourages people everywhere never to abandon the struggle for democracy, freedom and the rule of law.
Thank you very much for the honour you have shown me in presenting me with this order.
I would particularly like to thank His Majesty the King, who has bestowed this honour upon me.
The order is an expression of the deep friendship our countries enjoy.
This friendship is based on common values, mutual trust and the firm desire to shape the future together.
Our societies are closely linked to one another:
Every year almost 10,000 students from both Spain and Germany get to know the other country by participating in exchange programmes.
There are nearly 2000 cooperation agreements between German and Spanish universities.
In 2012 more than 9 million German tourists went on holiday to Spain.
“The world has lost a great statesman, someone who embodies reconciliation, peace and justice like few others.
As you know, I am a great fan of Spain myself.
Not only because of its rich culture and impressive scenery, but also because of its warm-hearted, open and genuine people.
In recent months Spanish citizens have demonstrated the strength of their determination to overcome the crisis.
Thanks to the reforms you have introduced, Spain is now in a position to leave the European assistance programme.
This constitutes a great success both for Spain and for Europe.
Spain has been a valued partner in Europe for many years.
We are glad to have a partner like Spain.
Speaking on 6 December in Berlin, Federal President Joachim Gauck paid tribute to Nelson Mandela at an event at Schloss Bellevue entitled “Human Rights – A Promise with a Future”:
“Our world has lost a towering figure.
His fight against the inhumanity of apartheid will remain unforgotten.
A free South Africa – that was his dream!
He was the architect of today’s rainbow nation.
Equally unforgotten is the role he played in the process of national reconciliation.
The Truth and Reconciliation Commission founded on his initiative helped people realise that it is not revenge but truth, law and the willingness to forgive that bring inner peace and open doors to the future.
“Anyone who deprives others of their freedom becomes a prisoner of hatred himself,” he explained.
Like countless others in Germany, I am grateful for all that Nelson Mandela has given the world.”
Message of condolence to Graça Machel, Nelson Mandela’s widow  Already in the morning of 6 December Federal President Joachim Gauck had sent his condolences to Nelson Mandela’s widow Graça Machel, on the death of her husband.
In his letter the Federal President offered Graça Machel and the people of South Africa his condolences on behalf of the whole German nation.
Nelson Mandela combined relentless drive with absolute integrity, a love of freedom with respect for the law and the quest for peaceful compromise with an insistence that historical truth must be made known.
The future of sustainable development
Minister of State Link is travelling to New York today to take part in the meeting of the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals.
Bild: The UN discusses sustainable development
What will follow the Millennium Development Goals?
They are there to set out the parameters for future sustainable development in all countries through the “post-2015 agenda”.
The United Nations’ Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) have guided the international community’s work in the field of development cooperation for 15 years.
They are to be implemented by 2015 – but what will come next?
These proposals will feed into the international negotiations on the post-2015 development agenda.
Setting the parameters for sustainable development in all countries
Bild: Minister of State Michael Georg Link
Minister of State Michael Georg Link is Germany's representative in the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals.
Link is travelling to New York today to take part in the Working Group's sixth meeting.
Topics such as human rights and good governance as well as the Global Partnership for Development are set to be discussed.
Minister of State Link stressed the importance of sustainable development goals before his trip:
Developing the post-2015 agenda is one of the most important international processes of the decade; the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals is part of that process.
It is setting the parameters of sustainable development in all countries.
During my visit to New York, I hope to see good progress made in the working group and successful discussions on such key cross-cutting issues as human rights and good governance, which are fundamental to sustainable development.
Further discussion topics - peace missions and the destruction of chemical weapons
During his visit to the UN, Minister of State Link will also hold talks with further partners -
he is due to meet with the UN Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Hervé Ladsous, to discuss the current state of affairs in the peace missions in Mali, South Sudan and the Sudan.
With Jeffrey Feltman, UN Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Link will discuss topics such as the preparations for the Geneva II conference on Syria.
In New York, Minister of State Link will also meet the UN Secretary-General's High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Angela Kane.
Kane heads the Office for Disarmament Affairs, making her Germany's highest-ranking official within the UN.
The focus of the discussion will be the progress made on destroying Syria's chemical weapons.
The United Nations Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) constitute eight objectives on development formulated in 2001.
They cover eradicating extreme poverty and hunger, achieving universal primary education, promoting gender equality and ensuring environmental sustainability.
More than 1100 German companies are active in Spain, thereby directly generating around 300,000 jobs in your country.
Allow me to take the opportunity during this ceremony to congratulate you, Mr President, and the Spanish people on this achievement.
Our countries are traditional and steadfast supporters of European integration.
Federal Foreign Minister Westerwelle on the situation in Thailand
Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle issued the following statement in Madrid today (10 December) in response to what has been happening in Thailand:
We call on all those in positions of political responsibility to act with moderation and restraint so that the situation does not spiral out of control.
What is needed now is not confrontation, but political debate and dialogue within the constitutional framework.
Further violence and the spilling of yet more blood on the streets of Bangkok would be a serious setback for democracy, political stability and social and economic development in Thailand.
The Federal Foreign Office is regularly updating its travel and security advice in the light of developments in Bangkok and other Thai cities.
Thailand:
Sarajevo
Travel and security advice
Apart from Kosovo, Bosnia and Herzegovina is the only country in the Western Balkans that has not yet applied for EU membership.
Through the Stabilization and Association Process, the EU is already providing support as the country moves closer to European structures.
Corruption hampers development and jeopardises economic growth.
The Agreement had been initialled in December 2007, but the EU had insisted that before signing Bosnia and Herzegovina should first meet certain important conditions relating to reform.
Deep friendship with Spain
In Madrid, Foreign Minister Westerwelle received the “Grand Cross of the Order of Civil Merit” from Prime Minister Rajoy.
Following this he met with his Spanish counterpart, García-Margallo.
Bild: Warm welcome in Madrid
Foreign Minister Westerwelle travelled to Madrid on Monday, where he received the “Grand Cross of the Order of Civil Merit”.
Following this, he met his Spanish counterpart José Manuel García-Margallo for a bilateral discussion.
On Tuesday morning he will take part in a public discussion on European policy known as the “Fórum Europa”.
The “Gran Cruz de la Orden del Mérito Civil” was awarded by the Spanish King Juan Carlos I and presented to the Foreign Minister by Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy at the palace of La Moncloa, his official residence.
Rajoy called the German Foreign Minister a great friend of Spain.
With the adoption of two laws on police force reform on 16 April 2008, the most important condition was fulfilled and the Agreement was duly signed.
Bild: Foreign Minister Westerwelle giving his speech of thanks
In his speech, Foreign Minister Westerwelle said,
It has since been ratified by all EU member states.
It undermines democratic institutions, slows down economic development and weakens governments.
“the order is an expression of the deep friendship our countries enjoy. This friendship is based on common values, mutual trust and the firm desire to shape the future together”.
A bazaar in Sarajevo
Foreign Minister Westerwelle's speech of thanks in Madrid
Common values, mutual trust
Bild: Westerwelle with Rajoy and García-Margallo
Afterwards, Foreign Minister Westerwelle met his Spanish opposite number García-Margallo for a bilateral discussion.
During his visit to Madrid, Foreign Minister Westerwelle will also take part in the public discussion “Fórum Europa” at the Nueva Economía Fórum on 10 December.
At this event, the topics of German-Spanish cooperation in managing the crisis as well as the future of the European Union are on the agenda.
Staunch supporters of Europe
Germany and Spain are connected by multifaceted relations, both the countries' economies as well as their societies are closely linked.
The Governments in Berlin and Madrid regularly consult each other on issues relating to European policy.
At the joint invitation of Foreign Minister Westerwelle and his Spanish counterpart García-Margallo, 16 European Foreign Ministers, a Vice-President of the EU Commission and Members of the European Parliament met recently, on 19 and 20 July 2013, in Palma de Mallorca for a “Roundtable on the future of Europe”.
They agreed on the Declaration of Mallorca for a strong, competitive and engaged Europe.
The latest German-Spanish intergovernmental consultations took place in Berlin in February 2013.
Most recently, Prime Minister Rajoy was in Berlin on 3 July 2013 for the Conference on Youth Unemployment.
Round table on the future of the EU
Fighting corruption in Africa and Latin America
I am worried about the potential for further escalation.
All travellers are urged to check the latest advice and observe it.
The Federal Foreign Office supports several United Nations projects to fight corruption.
As part of UNODC's Anti-Corruption Mentor Programme, countries in East and Southern Africa are to be assisted in their efforts to fight corruption.
Secondly, the country must establish an effective EU policy coordination mechanism.
Both conditions must be fulfilled before the submission of any application for EU membership.
The European Commission’s Progress Report on Bosnia and Herzegovina, 16 October 2013 (PDF, 728 KB)
The project supports authorities and civil society organisations at local level by developing programmes to prevent corruption.
More information on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s progress towards the EU can be found on the European Commission website
A EUFOR – ALTHEA poster near Sarajevo
The Bundeswehr participated in EUFOR – ALTHEA from 2004 to 2012.
More information on ALTHEA
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s steps towards NATO
The High Representative
Human Rights Commissioner on the occasion of Human Rights Day
Markus Löning, Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy, issued the following statement to mark today’s Human Rights Day (10 December):
I am very moved by the images of the protests on Kyiv’s streets.
Corruption is not a peripheral phenomenon restricted to poor countries, but a complex social, political and economic issue afflicting every country on the globe.
The United Nations made 9 December International Anti-Corruption Day to raise greater international awareness of corruption and its consequences.
An anti-corruption expert was appointed specifically to support target countries in drawing up guidelines and strategies to fight the phenomenon, and to advise national authorities on how to run information campaigns.
The Federal Foreign Office supported the Anti-Corruption Mentor Programme to the tune of 100,000 euros last year.
This year, the Federal Foreign Office has spent 110,000 euros to support a project by the transparency initiative Corporación Transparencia in Colombia.
In addition, public anti-corruption strategies are devised, put into practice and evaluated.
The technological possibilities of extensive surveillance of digital data transfer could endanger the privacy of every single person.
Even Christmas greetings we send via email are not intended to be read by others!
I would like to use Human Rights Day as an opportunity to draw attention to the need to intensify this debate.
It is therefore vital to show that privacy protection tools can also be used within the scope of the opportunities offered by modern digital communication.
Privacy protection is something which affects us all:
Together with his Office (Office of the High Representative), the High Representative monitors the implementation of the civilian aspects of the Accords.
Every day is human rights day - but the 65th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights provides a special opportunity to confront the issue.
They show just how relevant the question of the right to freedom of expression and assembly is, even in Europe!
Yet the protection of fundamental human rights must also be improved further in our climes.
Since the revelations concerning Internet surveillance by intelligence agencies emerged, confidence in the integrity of one of humanity’s most important forms of communication has been dealt a serious blow.
The United Nations drew attention to this fact recently in a resolution co-sponsored by Germany and Brazil.
On 26 November 2013 the Third Committee of the UN General Assembly unanimously approved the draft resolution on “The Right to Privacy in the Digital Age” co-sponsored by Brazil and Germany.
The resolution calls upon all states to observe human rights, especially the right to privacy, in surveillance activities and data collection, and calls for a report from the High Commissioner for Human Rights to be submitted to the United Nations Human Rights Council and to the Third Committee of the General Assembly in autumn 2014.
Funding secured for new tram line across the Rhine:
The Eastern Partnership
Bild: Family photo at the 2009 Prague Summit
The agreements with Georgia and Moldova were initialled at the Summit in Vilnius (28 to 29 November 2013).
However, the EU Foreign Ministers fixed a number of criteria for the signing of the agreement (free and fair elections, end of selective justice, progress with the reform agenda, particularly in the field of justice).
In accordance with Ukraine’s wishes, the envisaged signing of the agreement did not take place in Vilnius.
Joint Declaration of the Eastern Partnership Summit in Vilnius (PDF, 180 KB)
Joint Statement by the European Union and the Republic of Armenia (PDF, 535 KB)
Lithuania will host the next Eastern Partnership Summit in Vilnius on 28 and 29 November 2013.
The European External Action Service (EEAS) has been mandated to conduct the negotiations and, in keeping with its political instructions, is responsible for implementing the Eastern Partnership on the EU side, along with the European Commission.
On 4 and 5 October the Republic of Moldova hosted this year’s forum, the first of the partner countries to do so.
Under the keynote heading “Working Together for a European Future”, more than 250 representatives of civil society organisations in all six Eastern Partnership countries and the EU discussed among other things free elections, the media and freedom of opinion, corruption, visa liberalisation, energy and human rights and formulated policy recommendations.
It will also help to bring people in the Upper Rhine region even closer together.
This cross-border tram line will provide another powerful impetus for this dynamic European region spanning both sides of the Rhine.
We are particularly pleased that the European Union has made a substantial contribution to this project via its INTERREG fund for the Upper Rhine region.
Further information:
Like all other countries in the Western Balkans, Bosnia and Herzegovina also has a prospect of joining the European Union – as determined by the European Council in 2003.
Like all other countries in the Western Balkans, Bosnia and Herzegovina also has a prospect of joining the European Union – as was expressly stated by the European Council in Thessaloniki in 2003.
Before the Agreement can enter into force, however, Bosnia and Herzegovina still has to introduce a number of other crucial reforms.
It needs, firstly, to reform its electoral laws, for example, to make them compatible with the European Convention on Human Rights (complying with the European Court of Human Rights ruling in the Sejdic/Finci case concerning passive voting rights for minorities).
Through its EUFOR – ALTHEA operation the European Union has been helping the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina since 2004 to maintain a safe and protective environment in the country.
Some 900 military personnel are still serving with the mission.
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s second foreign policy priority after EU membership is NATO accession.
The Alsatian city of Strasbourg and the border town of Kehl in Land Baden-Württemberg agreed to extend the Strasbourg tram line "D" all the way to Kehl across the Rhine.
In spring 2012 the Governments of Germany and France concluded an international agreement to approve this cooperation project.
The project will be co-financed by the two countries.
In addition, Land Baden-Württemberg and the town of Kehl will make contributions.
The French funding plan envisages contributions from the French Government (to the tune of ten million euros), the Alsace regional council, the general council of the Département of Bas-Rhin and the City and Urban Community of Strasbourg.
A key component of the project is the construction of a new bridge over the Rhine which will serve as a further transport link between the two cities and countries.
Enlargement of the European Union:
milestones and future outlook
Voting on the 2007 EU enlargement
For over fifty years, since the establishment of the European Coal and Steel Community under the Schuman Plan in 1950, the European Communities and subsequently the European Union (EU) have brought their member states peace and stability.
Today the European Union (EU) is the world’s largest economic region and also a community of values. Its members are committed to democracy, the rule of law, freedom and human rights, they conduct many aspects of policy on a community basis.
The six founding members were:
Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg and the Netherlands.
Rounds of enlargement to date
Seven rounds of enlargement have taken place to date:
Accession of Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom
Accession of Greece
Accession of Portugal and Spain
Accession of Austria, Finland and Sweden
Accession of Bulgaria and Romania
Accession of Croatia
With the accession of Bulgaria and Romania on 1 January 2007, the fifth and largest round of enlargement was concluded – and Europe’s division after World War II finally ended.
Europe is more than a single market and a single currency.
Croatia was the first country of the former Yugoslavia to join the European Union on 1 July 2013.
Enlargement – outlook for the future
During his visit to Madrid, Foreign Minister Westerwelle praised Spain's efforts to reform at the "Fórum Europa".
At the same time he stressed the global challenges facing Europe.
Bild: Westerwelle and Solana
Warm welcome in Madrid
At the public discussion held in Madrid, “Fórum Europa”, Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle not only praised Spain’s reform efforts but also made it clear that Germany would stand by Spain in dealing with the economic and financial crisis.
Westerwelle had already emphasised the deep friendship between the two countries and their joint commitment to Europe on Monday.
At the beginning of his visit to Madrid, Westerwelle received the Spanish “Grand Cross of the Order of Civil Merit”.
Westerwelle had made a key contribution to enhancing bilateral relations as well as to European unification, Rajoy stated.
With regard to cooperation on European issues, Foreign Minister Westerwelle said that Spain had been a “valued partner in Europe for many years. Our countries are traditional and reliable supporters of European integration.”
Read more: Foreign Minister Westerwelle's speech of thanks in Madrid
Afterwards, Foreign Minister Westerwelle met his Spanish opposite number García-Margallo for a bilateral discussion.
As part of his visit to Madrid, on Tuesday Foreign Minister Westerwelle went on to take part in the public discussion “Fórum Europa” at the Nueva Economía Fórum.
At this event, the topics of German-Spanish cooperation in managing the crisis as well as the future of the European Union are on the agenda.
Bild: Nueva Economía Forum: view of the conference room
When he addressed the Forum, Westerwelle spoke of Spain's determined policy of reform.
The Minister noted that Germany had supported its partner in these efforts from the outset, and now they were both pleased to see signs that Spain was on the path to recovery.
Westerwelle equally stated that "the real competition is (...) between Europe and the world".
Common values needed to be protected, as
Speech by Foreign Minister Westerwelle to the "Fórum Europa"
At the joint invitation of Foreign Minister Westerwelle and his Spanish counterpart García-Margallo, 16 European Foreign Ministers, a Vice-President of the EU Commission and Members of the European Parliament met recently, on 19 and 20 July 2013, in Palma de Mallorca for a “Roundtable on the future of Europe”.
They agreed on the Declaration of Mallorca for a strong, competitive and engaged Europe.
The latest German-Spanish intergovernmental consultations took place in Berlin in February 2013.
Most recently, Prime Minister Rajoy was in Berlin on 3 July 2013 for the Conference on Youth Unemployment.
The EU is currently conducting accession negotiations with Iceland, Turkey and Montenegro.
Both the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Serbia have candidate country status. The other countries of the Western Balkans (Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo) have the status of potential candidate countries.
The EU’s enlargement policy has been a crucial agent of transformation in a large number of European countries.
The prospect of EU membership has clearly given the candidate countries a major incentive to push ahead with reforms.
The enlargement process has made for greater political and economic stability in Europe and strengthened freedom, democracy, the rule of law and respect for human rights.
The enlarged internal market has helped increase the EU’s competitiveness and prosperity.
Parameters of the enlargement process
Strasbourg and Kehl to move even closer together
After the recent commitments from Germany and France to grant funding for the extension of a tram line from the French city of Strasbourg to the German town of Kehl, the two Commissioners for Franco-German Cooperation, Ministers of State Michael Georg Link and Thierry Repentin, issued the following statement:
The great project of building a tram line between Strasbourg and Kehl across the Rhine is taking shape.
We have worked hard from the beginning to realise this project, which is designed to build bridges in the truest sense of the word.
The new tram line will not only reduce traffic on the Pont de l’Europe bridge.
We are delighted that joint Franco-German financing has paved the way for this forward-looking project, and would especially like to thank Land Baden-Württemberg and the City and Urban Community of Strasbourg for their dedication and financial support.
This shows us once more how much Europe helps improve the everyday lives of our citizens.
In Germany, part of the costs will be borne by the Federal Ministry of Transport, Building and Urban Development. It will make available funds of roughly 19 million euros from its federal programme under the Community Transport Financing Act.
These will be complemented by funds from the EU’s INTERREG fund for the Upper Rhine region.
Work on the tram line is scheduled to begin in the course of 2014.
Duckwitz and Josy had been two very different personalities and belonged to different generations.
What they had in common, however, was their refusal to stand idly by in the face of Nazi crimes.
“Shining example of civil courage and justice”
Michael Jovy was a member of the Edelweisspiraten, who helped Jews in hiding in Cologne.
He later served in various posts, including as ambassador in Algiers and Bucharest.
Only a tiny minority of Germans were willing to take a personal risk to help Jews.
As we now know, that goes for the Foreign Service as well.
It is a horrifying fact that German diplomats participated and actively collaborated in the Shoah.
The European Union has grown from six to currently 28 members – a highly attractive and successful model
What began with a population of 200 million in the six founding members of Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg and the Netherlands is now a grouping of 28 members with a population of almost 500 million.
In his reply Emanuel Nashon, Israel’s deputy head of mission in Berlin, thanked the Federal Foreign Office for paying tribute to Duckwitz and Jovy in this way.
Those honoured as Righteous Among the Nations were present-day heroes, too, he pointed out.
They made us realise that what was important in a democracy was not just the freedom but also the duty to speak out.
He wound up by thanking Foreign Minister Westerwelle for all he had done and assuring him that the people of Israel would always look on him as a friend.
“for we want these two men to become part and parcel of the Foreign Service’s collective memory.”
I condemn this act in the strongest possible terms.
Minister of State Link travelled to New York on 9 December to take part in the meeting of the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals.
Bild: The Open Working Group discusses sustainable development goals
In New York UN member states are negotiating the international community's future development goals.
Minister of State Link travelled to New York on 9 December to take part in the meeting of the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals.
At the UN Summit in Rio 2012 the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals was set up. It was tasked with elaborating a report outlining proposals for the UN General Assembly by autumn 2014.
These proposals will feed into the international negotiations on the post-2015 development agenda.
Link travelled to New York on 9 December to take part in the Working Group's sixth meeting, at which topics such as human rights and good governance as well as the Global Partnership for Development were discussed.
Bild: Minister of State Link with the UN Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Hervé Ladsous.
During his visit to the UN, Minister of State Link also held talks with further partners - on 9 December Link met with the UN Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Hervé Ladsous.
Ladsous thanked Link for Germany's engagement in UN peace missions.
They also discussed the current situation in Mali and Central Africa, as well as in Afghanistan and in the Congo.
Bild: Minister of State Link and the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Angela Kane.
On 10 December, Minister of State Link met the Secretary-General's High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Angela Kane.
Their discussion focussed on the progress made on destroying Syria's chemical weapons.
On 11 December, Minister of State Link then went on to meet Jeffrey Feltman, UN Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, in order to discuss the preparations for the Geneva II
conference on Syria.
Honouring Righteous Among the Nations
The certificates honouring German diplomats Georg Ferdinand Duckwitz and Michael Jovy for their efforts to save Jews are now on display in the Foreign Service Academy in Berlin-Tegel.
Reminders of the past abound at the Foreign Service Academy in Berlin-Tegel.
The foyer of the Language Training Centre is hung with group portraits of all seminars to date for international diplomats, the corridor leading to the Gerold-von-Braunmühl-Auditorium is lined with portraits of former German foreign ministers.
Since yesterday two rather different reminders of the past have been on display there —
certificates from Yad Vashem, the Holocaust memorial centre in Jerusalem, honouring Georg Ferdinand Duckwitz and Michael Jovy as Righteous Among the Nations. The two German diplomats, now both dead, were honoured years ago for their efforts to saveJews during the Holocaust.
Foreign Minister Westerwelle and writer Finkelgruen with the Yad Vashem certificates.
At a special ceremony to mark the occasion, Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle praised the two men as “shining examples of civil courage and justice”.
For Yad Vashem to award such certificates especially to German nationals was something both “remarkable and rare”, he noted.
Georg Ferdinand Duckwitz who had joined the Foreign Service during the war, learned in 1943 about plans on foot to deport Denmark’s Jews.
At great personal risk he passed this information on to the Danish Government and so enabled thousands to escape to Sweden.
After the war Duckwitz served in various posts, including as State Secretary of the Federal Foreign Office. As a close adviser to Willy Brandt, he helped shape the Federal Republic's new Ostpolitik.
When the group was finally broken up, he escaped through the lines to the US Army. He was granted political refugee status and did not join the Foreign Service until after the war.
Exceptional characters
In his speech Foreign Minister Westerwelle described Duckwitz and Jovy as quite exceptional characters, who risked their own lives to save Jews from persecution and death at the hands of the Nazis.
Meaningful remembrance
Certificates honouring Georg Ferdinand Duckwitz and Michael Jovy as Righteous Among the Nations on display at the Foreign Service Academy
The music during the ceremony was performed by a string quartet from Jewish Moses Mendelssohn Gymnasium in Berlin.
Those present included family members of the late diplomats as well as over 100 trainees from various branches of the Foreign Service.
On their way to and from classes every day, these young people will now pass by the certificates honouring Duckwitz and Jovy as Righteous Among the Nations. The choice of venue had been a very deliberate one, Foreign Minister Westerwelle explained,
Foreign Minister Westerwelle calls for the release of Sakharov Prize winner Zaitouneh
Foreign Minister Westerwelle today issued the following statement on the kidnapping of Sakharov Prize laureate Razan Zaitouneh and other Syrian human rights activists.
The kidnapping of human rights activists who fight to overcome oppression deals a severe blow to civil society in Syria.
The fearless work of Razan Zaitouneh and her fellow activists is symbolic of the Syrian citizens’ pursuit of peace, democracy and the rule of law.
I call for the immediate release of the civil rights activists and want to recall that all parties to the conflict in Syria are obliged to uphold international humanitarian law and respect human rights.
On 9 December gunmen seized Syrian human rights defender Razan Zaitouneh and civil rights activists Samira Khalil, Wael Hamada and Nazim Hamadi from the office of a Syrian human rights organisation in Duma, a Damascus suburb.
For many years now Sakharov Prize winner Razan Zaitouneh has been campaigning for the rights of political prisoners, freedom of expression and the disclosure of human rights violations.
Syria, however, has seen a rise in polio cases this year.
Oral polio vaccination
This is why the World Health Organization (WHO) and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) have launched a programme for the vaccination of 23 million children in the Middle East.
Vaccinations in refugee camps
Children under the age of five in Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, the Palestinian territories, Syria and Turkey will receive vaccinations.
In Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey the campaign will primarily target children in refugee camps.
In Syria alone, 2.2 million children are to be immunised.
Two in three hospitals and every third health centre have been destroyed or damaged, and many doctors and nurses have fled the country.
Federal Foreign Office supports vaccination campaign
After several cases of polio occurred in Syria, 23 million children are to be vaccinated in the Middle East.
The Federal Foreign Office will support the campaign which is being run by the World Health Organization and the United Nations Children’s Fund.
Federal Foreign Office supports vaccination campaign in the Middle East
The polio virus enters the nervous system and can cause paralysis of the entire body or even death within a few hours.
Thanks to consistent vaccination, Germany is officially considered free of this infectious childhood disease.
A major vaccination campaign is now being organised to protect 23 million children in Syria and its neighbouring countries.
At least 17 polio cases have so far occurred in Syria, many of them in the conflict zones in the north-east of the country.
Children will be vaccinated not only in Syria, but also in the neighbouring countries, as the civil war has forced hundreds of thousands of Syrians to leave their country for Lebanon, Jordan, Turkey and Iraq.
The Federal Foreign Office is providing some 4.1 million euros to support the programme, which is being run by the WHO and UNICEF.
According to UNICEF, the Syrian health care system has largely collapsed after over two and a half years of armed conflict.
The major WHO-UNICEF vaccination campaign is intended to help eradicate the disease, so that Syria and its neighbouring countries can soon be considered polio-free like Germany and the disease will not spread to other regions in the world.
German nationals are however still required to have a valid passport or equivalent document, such as a (provisional) ID card or a travel document used in place of a passport, with them when entering or leaving Germany. Failure to do so may result in a fine of up to 5000 euros.
Individual states may however still conduct checks at internal borders for a limited period of time if required by considerations of public order or national security.
Belgium, France, Germany, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain
In a vote in June 2005 the Swiss approved the Agreement with the European Union and the European Community on their country’s association with the Schengen acquis. Switzerland has thus applied the provisions of the Schengen Agreement from 12 December 2008. Checks at airports were abolished on 29 March 2009.
The requirement that German nationals carry a valid passport or equivalent document (e.g. ID card) when entering or leaving German territory continues to apply notwithstanding the existence of the Agreement.
Persons granted a short-stay visa with no territorial restrictions (category “C” visa) by a Schengen country may, for the duration of the visa’s validity, stay and travel freely in the territory of any other Schengen country.
Air passengers with transit visas (category “A” visa) are entitled only to enter the international transit area at airports but not the Schengen area itself.
The EU Council has approved an application by both countries to participate in the enhanced cooperation between police and judicial authorities in criminal justice matters, the fight against drug-related crime and the Schengen Information System (SIS).
The Global Partnership
The G8’s Global Partnership initiative is helping to reduce nuclear, chemical, biological and radiological proliferation risks.
The Federal Foreign Office funds numerous projects in this connection.
Preventing the spread of weapons of mass destruction
The G8 initiative “Global Partnership Against the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction” (GP) was launched at the 2002 G8 summit in Kananaskis (Canada).
For over a decade it has been making a major contribution to reducing nuclear, chemical, biological and radiological proliferation risks.
Initially the initiative concentrated only on the Russian Federation and tackling the Cold War era legacy of the Soviet Union.
The priorities were the destruction of chemical weapons, the dismantlement of the reactor compartments of decommissioned Russian nuclear submarines and the secure storage of fissile material at nuclear weapons sites and civil research centres.
Human Rights Commissioner Löning on death sentence handed down in Bangladesh
His name stands for dreadful crimes and huge suffering during the war of independence.
Nonetheless, the Federal Government rejects the death penalty on principle.
Moreover, there are doubts as to whether he received a fair trial.
International observers criticise the special tribunal set up to try crimes committed during the war of independence for not ensuring that the trials are carried out in keeping with the rule of law.
It is thought that up to three million people died during the war of independence.
The Agreement had been laboriously negotiated three weeks earlier in Dayton (USA), before it could be initialled by the Presidents Milosevic (Serbia), Tudman (Croatia) and Izetbegovic (Bosnia).
As from 2013 projects are funded in line with their specific requirements and not on the basis of national pledges.
Germany agreed to contribute to GP activities in this connection.
This German Partnership Program for Excellence in Biological and Health Security is part and parcel of Germany’s activities in support of the Global Partnership.
Federal Foreign Office projects
The Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology is responsible for the delivery of assistance in dismantling Russia’s nuclear submarines.
Pochep chemical weapons destruction plant, Russia
i.e. to destroy its entire stocks of chemical weapons (CW).
Its partner on the Russian side is the Ministry of Industry and Trade.
Completed projects
German contributions:
•    Construction of tank- and barrel-emptying facilities and an incineration plant for liquid and solid residuals; equipping of stationary and mobil laboratories.
“I appeal to the Government of Bangladesh not to carry out the death sentence imposed on Abdul Kader Mullah.
I therefore appeal to the authorities in Bangladesh to convert the sentences into terms of imprisonment and to put in place a moratorium on the death penalty.”
Early this year Abdul Kader Mullah was convicted of war crimes committed during the war of independence with Pakistan in 1971.
The country’s supreme court recently confirmed the death sentence, which
could be carried out any time now.
They say the accused have not been allowed appropriate defence representation or given a fair hearing in accordance with the law.
Value of German contributions: approx. € 150 million.
c) Pochep chemical weapons destruction plant, Bryansk region:
Operations commenced in late 2010.
The money will be spent on components and equipment for process control as well as the lining of one of the incinerators.
Projects in this area are intended to improve the physical protection of nuclear materials kept at Russian facilities such as closed nuclear cities, nuclear research institutes and Ministry of Defence sites.
The aim is to prevent fissile or highly radioactive materials falling into the hands of terrorist groups.
The implementing organization for the German assistance is the Reactor Safety Association (GRS).
The Russian partners are the Federal Atomic Energy Authority (Rosatom) and the Ministry of Defence.
Assistance for nuclear security around the world
Physical protection of highly radioactive materials
Chemical weapons destruction and nuclear security
21 long days – the path to the Dayton Peace Agreement
The signing of the Dayton Peace Agreement on 14 December 1995 officially brought the war in the former Yugoslavia to an end.
In our series “In the line of duty”, our colleague Christian Clages remembers the arduous negotiations in Dayton.
When the war in the former Yugoslavia came to an end in autumn 1995, Bosnia and Herzegovina was a war-torn and devastated country.
The Dayton Peace Agreement, signed on 14 December in Paris, formally ended the war and our colleague Christian Clages, who is now the Ambassador in Beirut, was at the negotiations.
Bild: The former Presidents of the warring sides before they initialled the Agreement
“We were expecting to spend a few days in seclusion and were then surprised to find that after three weeks we had still not reached a conclusion”, German diplomat Christian Clages remembers when thinking of the Dayton negotiations.
During the war he had been posted to Croatia and Bosnia, shortly before returning to Bonn he travelled to the peace negotiations in the US as a member of the German delegation.
They finally began on 1 November 1995 at an US air base in Dayton, Ohio.
This time there was real hope that a diplomatic solution to the war would at last be reached, Clages said:
The crucial difference between this and the previous attempts that had been made in the last three and a half years was that the parties were war weary and had become convinced that a military solution to the civil war would not be possible.
For the first time a ceasefire held, following a massive intervention by NATO late in the summer of 1995, which saw air strikes on Bosnian Serb positions.
All around Sarajevo, NATO Response Forces used artillery to ensure that the Serbs’ heavy weaponry was no longer deployed. This was a demonstration on the part of the West that they were no longer going to let the warring parties to lead them by the nose.
Failure out of the question?
Bild: Christian Clages
No one had wanted to imagine leaving Dayton without an agreement, according to Clages.
“At the start, the atmosphere was good. All sides wanted to achieve peace and the fundamental parameters – maintaining the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina whilst establishing two Entities which would enjoy extensive self-administration – had already been agreed in Geneva and New York.”
Nonetheless, at the opening session on 1 November the pressure to succeed weighed heavily on both mediators and warring parties as they sat at the round table.
US negotiator Richard Holbrooke sat at the table as host, next to him sat the Presidents Milosevic (Serbia), Izetbegovic (Bosnia) and Tudman (Croatia) as well as the EU’s representative for Bosnia, Carl Bildt.
Representatives from Russia and from the EU Contact Group comprising Germany, France and the United Kingdom were also present.
Christian Clages remembers:
Everyone who was there had – for very different reasons – an interest in achieving peace.
Milosevic wanted the sanctions imposed on Serbia to be lifted.
Tudman from Zagreb hoped that a solution to the issue of Eastern Slavonia would be reached in Dayton, which turned out to be the case.
Izetbegovic was well aware that if the war were to continue it would become ever harder to reconcile his people and country and to heal its wounds.
After the opening plenary in Dayton, all meetings were held in small groups, said Clages, from then on 'proximity talks' in the true sense of the word were held. Negotiators shuttled back and forth between the parties. There were no more plenary sessions, the crucial discussions took place bilaterally.
First step – agreement on the Federation
Bild: Dayton’s local newspaper reports on the agreement on the Federation (11 November 1995)
Under the leadership of Wolfgang Ischinger, a former Ambassador, and Michael Steiner, the current Ambassador in New Delhi, the German delegation spent the first few days in Dayton working on the special topic of a federation agreement between Bosnian Croats and Bosnian Muslims (Bosniaks).
This related to how the Bosnian-Croat Federation would be organised, as well as to the status of the town of Mostar.
We then managed to persuade the parties to agree on a text which was over ten pages long.
In the moment when it was finished, Clages describes, Holbrooke looked at the paper and said “wow, that’s real stuff!”.
He then said that the representatives of the Federation had already agreed on the distribution of competencies between the Central Government and the Federation and had thus outlined a significant part of the constitution.
On 10 November, the agreement on the Federation was signed in Dayton.
Dramatic negotiations
Alongside factual information, the telegrams sent to Bonn by the German delegation also conveyed a sense of the increasingly arduous nature of the talks.
On 14 November they read:
“There will be no agreement in Dayton on Wednesday or Thursday... we are now reckoning with the event ending – with or without success – on Saturday.”
Bild: Sarajevo with a view over the cemetery
“Unfortunately the deadlock in Dayton has yet to end... a last minute failure is not out of the question.”
“At the very last minute, early on Monday morning, the US and the whole Contact Group were confronted with completely unexpected and potentially catastrophic developments in the negotiations...”
Christian Clages remembers that last differences over the map, namely over apportioning 51 percent to the Federation and 49 percent to the Serbian Republic (Republic of Srpska), nearly put paid to the negotiation process.
On Monday we had all packed our bags and given up hope that we would achieve a positive outcome.
There was a real danger of leaving with nothing to show for it.
The talks finally got back on track and German diplomats mediated in individual discussions.
The US were on the brink of declaring the meeting over.
However, on 21 November, at 13.35 local time the message could be sent to Bonn that:
“as informed by telephone, after dramatic final negotiations on the map in which only the question of Brcko remained unresolved and many wanted to give up, the breakthrough did indeed come early this morning.”
Christian Clages on this:
I don’t remember feeling any kind of euphoria, only relief that, after three weeks, we were not leaving Dayton empty-handed.
However the future promised to be difficult and, in light of the challenge of implementing the Peace Agreement, uncertain.
Bild: Carl Bildt, first High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina (1995)
Two weeks after the signing of the Peace Agreement on 14 December in Paris, Christian Clages returned to Sarajevo to work in the Office of the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Carl Bildt.
“I arrived on 28 December and was, alongside Carl Bildt’s British military advisor, the first to get there. We moved into our offices, there were no window panes, we had plastic sheeting on the windows – it was extremely cold, but I was back in Sarajevo! I was really happy to be back amongst my friends – and now as a first, in times of peace.”
Part 3 of our series “In the line of duty” – the path to the Dayton Agreement:
the “General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina”, signed in Paris on 14 December 1995, officially brought the war in the former Yugoslavia to an end.
As a member of the European Contact Group on Bosnia, the Federal Government played an active part in the process.
Click here for the text of the Dayton Peace Agreement
BOPCW inspection in Libya (file photo)
At the request of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), Germany provided logistical support for three inspections of Libyan chemical weapons storage sites, which took place in November 2011 as well as January and April 2012.
Air transport to Libya for the OPCW’s team of international inspectors was supplied by the German Air Force.
Libya’s transitional government is keen to meet the country’s obligation to secure all its chemical weapons and destroy them as soon as possible.
Germany acted quickly to supply equipment for decontamination and analysis. Working closely with the OPCW, it will continue to help Libya fulfil its obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention.
In March 2013 Germany, the United States and Libya took an important step and gave the go ahead for a new joint project.
The aim is to construct, with German and US support, a chemical weapons destruction facility in Libya along with the relevant infrastructure.
The money will be spent notably on a German-made and highly advanced flue gas treatment plant, which will allow the highly toxic chemicals contained in the chemical weapons to be destroyed in an environmentally safe manner.
In August and September 2013 Libyan experts were trained in Germany in how to operate the plant.
In the nuclear field Germany agreed with the Libyan authorities in May 2012 that nuclear security projects would be vetted and implemented as quickly as possible.
In this connection the Federal Foreign Office liaises closely with the IAEA’s Office of Nuclear Security.
On current thinking, priority will be given to:
•    modernising the physical protection of the civilian nuclear research facility in Tajura near Tripoli, •    improving the physical protection and storage of medical radioactive sources •    equipping border crossing points with nuclear detectors.
Chemical weapons destruction
Following Iraq’s accession to the Chemical Weapons Convention in 2009, the German Government pledged to assist it in cleaning up sites contaminated by chemical warfare agents.
A major problem is that nothing is known about the composition and condition of the materials stored there.
A detailed analysis is required before any further action can be taken.
In 2012 Germany and Iraq agreed that Germany would supply a container load of instruments for detection and analysis.
Iraqi experts are also being trained in Germany in the use of these instruments.
This will ensure that Iraq has the resources needed to embark on the task of cleaning up such sites.
Germany’s assistance will enable the Iraqi authorities to determine the nature of these suspected chemical weapons.
German Partnership Program for Excellence in Biological and Health Security
The aim is not only to prevent any misuse of infectious agents that could pose a threat also to Germany but also to strengthen the health services of our partner countries in Africa, Central Asia and South America, thus enhancing their national security.
Priority is given to six areas:
G8 logo
In 2002 the G8 partners (Britain, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Russia and the United States) had earmarked up to US$ 20 billion for the initiative.
With a pledge of up to US$ 1.5 billion, Germany is the second largest contributor.
Other pledges were made by the US (US$ 10 billion), the EU (€ 1 billion), Italy (€ 1 billion), Britain (US$ 0.75 billion), France (€ 0.75 billion), Canada (US$ 0.65 billion) and Japan (US$ 0.2 billion).
Russia plans to spend US$ 2 billion on destroying its chemical weapons and dismantling nuclear submarines.
Other donors are Australia, Belgium, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, Ireland, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, South Korea, Sweden and Switzerland.
In 2006 GP projects were launched also in other Soviet Union successor states and since 2008 GP projects have been under way in other parts of the world as well.
At their summit in Deauville (France) in 2011, G8 Heads of State and Government finally agreed that the initiative, which was originally intended to run to the end of 2012, should continue with new priorities and new funding arrangements.
Future GP projects will be concerned with new areas such as biosecurity, nuclear security, the engagement and redirection of scientists formerly employed on weapons of mass destruction (WMD) programmes, implementation of UN Security Council Resolution 1540 (curbing WMD proliferation) as well as regions posing nonproliferation challenges.
The main focus of the 2012 G8 Summit at Camp David during the US G8 presidency in 2012 was biosecurity.
The Federal Foreign Office accordingly launched a three-year programme (2013–2016) implemented in cooperation with partner countries and designed to mitigate biological security risks and build the required capacities in this area.
The Federal Foreign Office is responsible for the implementation of German Government projects in the areas of chemical weapons destruction, improved physical protection of nuclear facilities and biosecurity.
The Federal Foreign Office is supported in its work in this connection by the Federal Office of Bundeswehr Equipment, Information Technology and In-Service Support, which acts as technical adviser.
In the area of biosecurity it is supported by a programme office run by the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) and the Robert Koch Institute – Federal Institute for Infectious and Non-communicable Diseases (RKI) as well as by a number of other specialised German Institutes.
Destruction of chemical weapons in the Russian Federation
For over ten years now Germany has been helping the Russian Federation to fulfil its obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC),
a) Gorny chemical weapons destruction plant, Saratov region (2002-2005):
Destruction of the entire stocks of 1142 tonnes of mustard gas and lewisite (skin blister agents).
Value of German contributions: approx. € 50 million
b) Kambarka chemical weapons destruction plant, Republic of Udmurtia (2003-2006):
•    Planning and construction of a complete destruction facility for residuals, with buildings (including incineration line and wastewater treatment unit) and a tank-emptying facility.
After three years of construction the plant was inaugurated on 1 March 2006; Russian clearance to operate the German equipment was received on 20 March 2007.
By March 2009 the entire stocks of over 6300 tonnes of chemical weapons had been destroyed.
•   Germany provided up to € 142.7 million to fund the plant’s technological centrepiece: the construction of a massive incinerator for the destruction of chemical weapons and solid residuals, including the relevant operations centre, and a wastewater treatment unit.
The foundation stone was laid on 10 June 2008.
Since then some 7500 tonnes of the nerve gases Vx, Sarin and Soman, mostly contained in more than 67,000 shells, have been destroyed.
d) Kisner chemical weapons destruction plant, Republic of Udmurtia
Germany has earmarked a total of up to € 20 million for the Kisner chemical weapons destruction plant currently being built in the Republic of Udnurtia.
There are 5745 tonnes of nerve gases in Kisner awaiting destruction.
Physical protection of nuclear facilities in the Russian Federation
Over the period 2003-2012 some € 167 million were spent on such measures.
In 2009 the German Government pledged up to € 10 million from Global Partnership funds to implement measures under the Nuclear Security Plan of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
Since 2010 a project has been under way in Ukraine to improve physical protection for highly radioactive materials. With a funding volume of some € 6 million, the project is due to be completed in late 2013.
Germany has earmarked € 4 million for the project.
Since then it has been exploring with the Iraqi authorities, in close consultation with the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), how to deal with the warfare agents stored at Al Muttanah.
This will cost around € 1 million.
In 2013 Germany launched a new programme to implement long-term biosecurity projects under Global Partnership auspices.
Under this Programme a range of projects are being implemented around the world in cooperation with various specialised German institutes (RKI, Bernard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine, Friedrich-Löffler-Institut – Federal Research Institute for Animal Health and the Gesellschaft für internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ).
The main focus is on the Middle East, North Africa and Central Asia.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier today returned to the Federal Foreign Office after a good four years’ absence.
After a good four years’ absence Foreign Minister Steinmeier is now back at the Federal Foreign Office on Werderscher Markt in Berlin.
His predecessor Guido Westerwelle will welcome him at the entrance and hand over to the new Foreign Minister at a ceremony held in the Weltsaal.
Afterwards Frank-Walter Steinmeier and Guido Westerwelle will retire to the Minister's Office for talks.
Later in the afternoon the new German Cabinet will hold its first meeting.
1982 First state law examination
1986 Second state law examination
1991 Desk officer for media law and policy, State Chancellery of Land Lower Saxony
Following Federal Chancellor Angela Merkel’s re-election in the Bundestag, Federal President Gauck today swore in the new Cabinet at a festive ceremony in Schloss Bellevue.
He appointed Frank-Walter Steinmeier, until today chair of the SPD parliamentary group in the Bundestag, to the post of Foreign Minister.
This means that the top diplomat of the 2005–2009 Grand Coalition will have the same job in the new Coalition Government between the CDU/CSU and the SPD.
(Soon afterwards Foreign Minister Steinmeier will leave on his first trip abroad since taking up his new post.)
Born in Mainz on 23 April 1950, Roman Catholic
1974 Completed doctorate at the University of Mainz
1975 Awarded the international prize"Zur Pädagogik der Gegenwart" (Education of the Present) in Vienna
1982 Post-doctoral thesis in education at the University of Mainz, research postings at the universities of Cambridge and Augsburg
5 January 1956 Born in Detmold, Lippe District 1966 - 1974 Grammar school in Blomberg
1974 - 1976 Military service
1976 - 1982 Read law and from 1980 political science at the Justus-Liebig-Universität in Giessen
1983 - 1986 Legal training in Frankfurt am Main and Giessen
1986 - 1991 Academic assistant, Chair of Public Law and Political Science, Department of Law, Giessen University
1993 - 1994 Head of the Office of the Minister-President of Land Lower Saxony
1994 - 1996 Head of the State Chancellery department responsible for policy guidelines and interministerial coordination and planning
1996 - 1998 State Secretary and Head of the State Chancellery of Land Lower Saxony
1998 - 1999 State Secretary in the Federal Chancellery and Commissioner for the Federal Intelligence Services
1999 - 2005 Also Head of the Federal Chancellery
November 2005 - October 2009 Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs
November 2007 - October 2009 Deputy Chancellor
2009 - 2013 Chair of the SPD parliamentary group
1982 – 1990 Gender Equality Representative of Land Rhineland-Palatinate
Since 1985 Member of the Christian Democratic Union of Germany (CDU)
Since 1992 Member of the ZDF Television Council, Deputy Chair since June 2002
1994 Launched the nationwide "Red Card" campaign against violence in the media
Since 1994 Member of the CDU National Executive Committee
Since 2001 Professor at the Heidelberg University of Education
2004 Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany
Since November 2008 Member of the Central Committee of German Catholics
Maria Böhmer, Minister of State at the Federal Foreign Office
1968 – 1971 Read mathematics, physics, political science and education; state examination
1991 – 1993 Deputy Chair of the CDU Programme Commission and Head of the Commission Group Ecological and Social Market Economy
2000 – 2005 Deputy Chair of the CDU/CSU parliamentary group
Until November 2001 Chair of Land Rhineland-Palatinate Women’s Union of the CDU
Since September 2001 Chair of the national Women’s Union of the CDU
2005 – 2013 Minister of State at the Federal Chancellery and Federal Government Commissioner for Migration, Refugees and Integration
2006 – 2010 Member of the Presidium of the CDU
Human Rights Commissioner Markus Löning on the anniversary of the disappearance of the Lao civil rights activist Sombath Somphone.
I am deeply concerned as what happened to him remains unclear.
Together with them, I hope he will soon return.
Human Rights Commissioner reacts to execution in Japan
Markus Löning, Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy, issued the following statement today (13 December):
It is particularly shocking that the Japanese Government continues to adhere to the policy of informing neither the condemned individual nor the family that the execution is imminent, rendering a personal farewell impossible.
The death penalty is an inhumane and cruel punishment.
So far, more than two thirds of all countries around the world have abolished the death penalty or are observing a moratorium.
I once again call on the Japanese Government to refrain from carrying out further death sentences and to conduct an open debate in society about the death penalty; this punishment is an anachronism in the 21st century.
The two men put to death on Thursday are a 63-year-old who stabbed two people during robberies in 2000 and 2008 and a 55-year-old who murdered a member of his ex-wife’s family in 1986 and another person connected to her at a later date.
As is usual in Japan, the executions took place without prior warning being given to the condemned men, their families or the public.
Frank-Walter Steinmeier, until today chair of the SPD parliamentary group in the Bundestag, was appointed Foreign Minister.
Steinmeier and Westerwelle will then retire to the Minister's Office for talks
Together with Federal Chancellor Merkel, Foreign Minister Steinmeier will leave on Wednesday on his first trip abroad since taking up his new post.
I was appalled to hear that another two people have been executed in Japan.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier sworn in
In the Bundestag Frank-Walter Steinmeier was today sworn in as Foreign Minister of the new Grand Coalition.
Following Federal Chancellor Angela Merkel’s re-election in the Bundestag, Federal President Gauck today appointed the new Cabinet at a festive ceremony in Schloss Bellevue.
Frank-Walter Steinmeier, until today chair of the SPD parliamentary group in the Bundestag, was appointed Foreign Minister and afterwards sworn in in the Bundestag.
In the early afternoon Foreign Minister Steinmeier is due to arrive at the Federal Foreign Office for the handover ceremony.
His predecessor Guido Westerwelle will welcome him at the entrance and hand over to the new Foreign Minister at a ceremony in the Weltsaal.
In Paris they will hold talks with French President François Hollande and Foreign Minister Laurent Fabius.
A year ago to the day, on 15 December 2012, Sombath Somphone disappeared.
Sombath Somphone is a member of Lao civil society who is particularly well respected also in Germany. He is the key initiator, organiser and visionary behind the most important European-Asian civil society forum, the Asia-Europe People Forum held mid-October 2012, which played a major role in bolstering dialogue between the people of Europe and Asia.
In 2005, Sombath Somphone was presented with the Ramon Magsaysay Award for Community Leadership.
He was selected for this major honour due to his tireless efforts to further sustainable development in Laos by training and motivating the country’s young people.
He also works with inspirational dedication to combat poverty and increase the level of participation of the village populations.
I would like to remind the Lao Government of its responsibility to investigate Sombath Somphone’s disappearance in a thorough and transparent manner.
We consider the official investigations performed to date to be insufficient and lacking in conviction.
The unclear circumstances surrounding Somphone’s disappearance have the potential to harm the international standing of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic.
On this sad anniversary, my thoughts and sympathy are with Sombath Somphone’s friends and family.
Milestone for more security
Vote in the General Assembly
It covers battle tanks, armoured combat vehicles, large-calibre artillery systems, combat aircraft and attack helicopters, warships, missiles and missile launchers as well as small arms and light weapons.
Arms Trade Treaty:
On 2 April 2013 the General Assembly of the United Nations (UN) in New York voted by a large majority for a resolution adopting a treaty to regulate the global arms trade (ATT).
UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon spoke of a “historic achievement” and a “victory for the world’s people”.
As recently as 28 March 2013 opposition by Iran, North Korea and Syria had blocked agreement at the UN Arms Trade Treaty Conference on a final text laying down legally binding minimum standards for conventional arms transfers.
Its adoption at the conference would have required a consensus of all 193 participating countries.
Following its failure at the conference, the text of the Arms Trade Treaty was referred to the UN General Assembly on 2 April, where a simple majority sufficed for its approval.
At least 50 countries must ratify the Treaty before it can enter into force.
Resolution of the UN General Assembly adopting the Arms Trade Treaty (draft resolution text of 1 April 2013)
More on the General Assembly vote on the Arms Trade Treaty on the UN website
More on the UN Conference on the Arms Trade Treaty on the UN website
Foreign Minister Westerwelle expresses regret at lack of consensus on global Arms Trade Treaty
Federal Foreign Office provides 600,000 euros for UN facility to fund implementation of the Arms Trade Treaty
Federal Foreign Minister Steinmeier takes office
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier today returned to the Federal Foreign Office after a good four years’ absence.
Teaserbild: Former Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle greets his successor in the Federal Foreign Office
Federal Foreign Minister Steinmeier takes office
He then took over his official duties from his predecessor, Guido Westerwelle, at the Federal Foreign Office.
Bild: Foreign Minister Steinmeier is appointed by Federal President Gauck
Afterwards, he was sworn in in the Bundestag.
Steinmeier - chance to forge ahead with foreign policy
Bild: Former Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle welcomes his successor at the Federal Foreign Office
Foreign Minister Steinmeier arrived at the Federal Foreign Office for the official handover in the early afternoon, where he was received by his predecessor, Guido Westerwelle.
Steinmeier and Westerwelle first had a discussion on the handover in the Foreign Minister's offices.
The outgoing Foreign Minister Westerwelle then officially handed over his office to his successor in a ceremony in the fully packed Weltsaal at the Federal Foreign Office.
In his inaugural speech, Foreign Minister Steinmeier thanked his predecessor Westerwelle.
He had "contributed to Germany staying on track in European policy over the last four years".
Moreover, he had stood by the "culture of military restraint", which had not only brought him praise.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier then addressed his new tasks, he was pleased to once again manage foreign policy and also "to have the chance to forge ahead with issues".
The basis of German foreign policy stands firm and has proven itself - European integration, the transatlantic partnership, an active role in shaping a peaceful global order.
At the same time he was convinced that simply "repeating familiar and tried-and-tested mantras" would not be enough in a "world undergoing sweeping change".
Bild: Inaugural speech by Foreign Minister Steinmeier
The new Foreign Minister then outlined the foreign policy challenges of the coming years.
Steinmeier stressed that the substance of foreign policy and diplomacy lay in intelligent analysis.
He concluded with Willy Brandt's words, according to whom diplomacy is "strategic planning for peace".
Click here for photos of the handover ceremony
Later in the afternoon the new German Cabinet held its first meeting.
Together with
Federal Chancellor Merkel, Foreign Minister Steinmeier will leave on Wednesday on his first trip abroad since taking up his new post.
Federal Foreign Minister Steinmeier
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier’s speech at the handover ceremony in the Federal Foreign Office on 17 December 2013
Foreign Minister Steinmeier enters office
On 17 December 2013 Foreign Minister Steinmeier took over office from his predecessor Guido Westerwelle.
You can see the day in pictures here.
Bild 1: Foreign Minister Steinmeier is appointed by Federal President Gauck
Bild 2: Foreign Minister Steinmeier being sworn in in the Bundestag
Bild 3: Former Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle welcomes his successor at the Federal Foreign Office
Bild 4: Walking through the Foreign Minister’s offices together
Bild 5: Group photo of the former and new Federal Foreign Office leadership
Bild 6: The incoming and outgoing Foreign Ministers in the Weltsaal of the Federal Foreign Office
Bild 7: Guido Westerwelle and Frank-Walter Steinmeier
Bild 8: Members of staff at the handover ceremony
Bild 9: Guido Westerwelle and Frank-Walter Steinmeier
Bild 10: Guido Westerwelle leaves the Federal Foreign Office
The friendship between Germany and France is unique, the partnership between our two countries irreplaceable.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier comments on relations with France before his trip to Paris
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier issued the following statement in Berlin today (18 December) before departing for Paris:
Minister of State Roth:
European policy talks with Lithuania
Top export:
European fundamental values
He believes there is work to be done on further improving the protection of fundamental values.
Minister of State Roth went on to say:
The credibility of the European Union depends on how we deal with European fundamental values.
After all, these fundamental values are our top export.
Michael Roth and Vytautas Leškevičius during their talks
At the end of this first meeting, Vytautas Leškevičius wished his German colleague all the best for the tasks that lie ahead and thanked him for this early opportunity for talks.
Minister of State Roth assured Leškevičius that he was looking forward to further cooperation on bilateral and European issues.
Find out more about bilateral relations with Lithuania
Special responsibility for Franco-German cooperation
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and Federal Chancellor Merkel in Paris this evening for first political talks
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier and Federal Chancellor Angela Merkel are in Paris this evening for first political talks.
Even before the meeting, Foreign Minister Steinmeier emphasised the unique nature of the friendship between Germany and France.
Reception in the Élysée Palace
Federal Chancellor Merkel and Foreign Minister Steinmeier are in Paris this evening for bilateral talks.
Common agenda
French President Hollande began by giving the following assurance:
At dinner the conversation revolved mainly around preparations for the European Council meeting on 19/20 December.
France is Germany's closest and most important partner in Europe.
There is no other country with which we coordinate so regularly and intensively in all areas.
A selection of photos from the Paris visit can be found in our media centre:
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ)
EU fundamental values are our top export
In his new role as Minister of State for Europe, Michael Roth’s first official appointment was to welcome his Lithuanian colleague Vytautas Leškevičius for talks in Berlin.
In his new role as Minister of State for Europe at the Federal Foreign Office , Michael Roth’s first official appointment was to welcome his Lithuanian colleague Vytautas Leškevičius for talks in Berlin.
In the discussions, the focus was on European policy cooperation between Germany and Lithuania, the country which holds the Presidency of the Council of the European Union until the end of the year.
Minister of State Roth and Lithuania’s Vice-Minister for Europe Leškevičius
On Wednesday, Minister of State for Europe Michael Roth welcomed his first guest to the Federal Foreign Office, namely his counterpart from Vilnius.
The talks centred on the Eastern Partnership and EU enlargement issues.
As Lithuania’s six-month Presidency of the Council of the European Union draws to a close, Michael Roth and Vytautas Leškevičius took stock together.
Minister of State Roth went on to emphasise the importance of the EU’s fundamental values.
For him, it is now essential to continue with the legislative initiative launched by Germany and others.
First official visit to France
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and Federal Chancellor Merkel travelled to Paris on 18 December 2013 for first political talks.
The main focus is on preparing the European Council meeting at the end of the week.
Bilateral and international issues are also on the agenda.
On what is their first foreign trip since being sworn in yesterday, they are meeting both President François Hollande and Foreign Minister Laurent Fabius.
Even before leaving Germany, Foreign Minister Steinmeier emphasised the unique nature of the Franco-German relationship,
saying:
We intend to pool our efforts, our determination and our creativity – to benefit our countries and to help make Europe a success.
"We have a shared perspective from which must emerge a common agenda.
Europe needs the relationship between France and Germany.”
However, bilateral and international issues – from the situation in Ukraine to the Central African Republic – were also a focus of this first meeting of the two sides since the new Federal Government was sworn in yesterday.
More about the visit to Paris on the Federal Government website.
The Franco-German Year celebrating the 50th anniversary of the Élysée Treaty (which was signed on 22 January 1963) has paid tribute to the Franco-German friendship with a host of different events in both Germany and France throughout this year, including a joint session of the two Parliaments and Governments.
More information about Franco-German relations can be found here.
First official visit to France Last updated on 18 December 2013
There they met French President Hollande and Foreign Minister Fabius.
Reception at the Élysée Palace
Federal Chancellor Merkel and French President Hollande
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and President Hollande in front of the Élysée Palace
The two Foreign Ministers before the talks
A somewhat different official visit:
The visitor brought a very special gift with him:
The artist was inspired by the way Brandt delivered the speech, pausing several times and lowering his eyes in thought.
A picture for the new yet old office
"Good luck to my friend, Frank.
I wish you every success and a sure hand, which I know you have, for the huge task that lies ahead."
Born in East Prussia in 1930, he studied music in Berlin after the war before changing to acting.
Armin Mueller-Stahl and Frank-Walter Steinmeier with the portrait of Willy Brandt
Mueller-Stahl wished the new Foreign Minister all the best on assuming office:
The Minister thanked him warmly for the portrait which is to hang in a prominent position above his desk.
Armin Mueller-Stahl is one of the world’s best known German actors.
The actor Armin Mueller-Stahl was one of the first to visit the new Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier and presented him with a portrait he had done of Willy Brandt.
French Foreign Minister Fabius, Federal Chancellor Merkel, President Hollande and Foreign Minister Steinmeier (from left to right) in front of the Élysée Palace
Foreign Minister Steinmeier with his French colleague Fabius
At the behest of Foreign Minister Steinmeier, the Federal Foreign Office has established a crisis unit to monitor and respond to the current situation in South Sudan.
Crisis unit takes steps to evacuate German nationals from South Sudan
All German nationals in South Sudan have been called upon to be prepared for evacuation.
Willy Brandt moves into the Minister’ office
One of the first guests to be received by the new Foreign Minister, Frank-Walter Steinmeier, in the Federal Foreign Office in Berlin on 18 December, was the actor and artist Armin Mueller-Stahl.
a lithograph he had done himself of former Federal Chancellor Willy Brandt who that very day would have celebrated his 100th birthday – and who, prior to being elected Federal Chancellor, also served as Foreign Minister from 1966 to 1969.
Mueller-Stahl’s portrait depicts Brandt quite lost in thought with his eyes closed and,beside him,a quotation from the policy statement he gave on 28 October 1969:
"We want to become a people of good neighbours within and without."
Bild: The picture is to decorate the wall over Steinmeier’s desk
"A wonderful gift, and, what is more, on Willy Brandt's 100th birthday – that will be the first picture I hang up in my new yet old office."
After numerous film and theatre hits in the former German Democratic Republic, the Federal Republic of Germany and the United States, Mueller-Stahl announced his retirement from the film world in 2006 and has since focused more on painting, music and work to promote young artists.
The crisis unit has decided to take steps to evacuate German nationals from the country.
Bundeswehr aircraft are on the way there to evacuate German nationals.
Up-to-date travel and safety advice for South Sudan is available here: South Sudan
Pardoning Mikhail Khodorkovsky has been a good decision.
We hope that Mikhail Khodorkovsky will be released as soon as possible.
Overview of amendments
I welcome the fact that with the amnesty the Russian Duma is showing clemency towards such a large number of people.
Provisions for Germans abroad
Here you can find information on the main issues covered by the present legislation.
Children born in Germany to foreign parents may acquire German nationality if certain conditions are met.
As a general rule, foreigners have the right to become naturalised after eight years of habitual residence in Germany, provided they meet the relevant conditions.
The minimum period of residence for spouses of German nationals is usually shorter.
For naturalisation, it is necessary to prove adequate knowledge of German.
In general, those applying for naturalisation must give up their foreign nationality.
These apply for example to elderly persons and victims of political persecution.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier on Khodorkovsky being pardoned
Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement in Warsaw today (19 December) on President Putin’s decision to pardon Mikhail Khodorkovsky and to grant amnesty to Russian prisoners:
Whether the laws of the applicant’s country of origin also permit multiple nationality must be clarified in advance.
Political talks in Warsaw
Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s first official visit focuses on cooperation within the Weimar Triangle alongside bilateral topics.
Another priority is the situation in Ukraine.
Castle Square with Sigismund’s Column and the Royal Castle
During his first official visit to Warsaw, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier will focus on cooperation within the Weimar Triangle alongside bilateral topics.
Another priority in the discussions will be the situation in Ukraine.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier will arrive in the capital of Poland in the afternoon –
during his first official visit to Germany’s eastern neighbour political talks with President Bronisław Komorowski and Foreign Minister Radosław Sikorski are on the agenda.
They will discuss the status and further enhancement of bilateral relations.
In addition to this the situation in Ukraine will be a priority of the talks in Warsaw.
The German Foreign Minister will have a meeting on the matter with the former Polish President Aleksander Kwaśniewski.
His expertise on the country is widely recognised.
The Foreign Minister’s collaboration with the Polish side at this early stage combined with yesterday’s visit to Paris underlines the enduring significance of the Weimar Triangle for cooperation on European policy.
Numerous joint projects have made a practical contribution to strengthening Europe.
Bilateral relations with France and Poland
Startseite: On 18 December the UN General Assembly adopted a resolution tabled by Germany and Brazil on protecting online privacy.
Further details concerning nationality law are available on the website of the Federal Ministry of the Interior, the government agency responsible for legislative reforms in the field.
On 18 December the UN General Assembly adopted a resolution tabled by Germany and Brazil on protecting online privacy.
Many states and non-governmental organisations (NGOs) regard the paper as an important signal in terms of implementing human rights in the digital age.
Impressive response to the joint initiative
Bild: Foreign Minister Steinmeier (during his inaugural speech)
In the light of the current debate in the US, the German Foreign Minister went on to say:
I believe that something has been set in motion in the United States, too.
The group of experts established by President Obama has recognised a need for reform and put forward relevant proposals.
I trust that the right and necessary decisions will soon be taken in Washington in order to re-adjust the balance between legitimate security interests and the protection of individual privacy.
Wittig also declared before the Human Rights Committee:
Following the unanimous adoption of the German-Brazilian initiative on the protection of privacy as a human right by the UN General Assembly on 18 December, Foreign Minister Steinmeier was pleased with the “impressive response”, which would provide the incentive “to now pursue this route within the United Nations with all due consequence”.
“Through this resolution, the United Nations establishes, for the first time, that the same rights that people enjoy offline also need to be protected online.”
The resolution initiated by Germany and Brazil requires UN member states to verify whether the surveillance they carry out respects human rights.
In the case of Germans living abroad, a key factor to be considered is whether they still have ties with Germany, such as close relatives or property in the country.
Please note that permission to retain German nationality must be obtained before acquiring the new nationality.
People living abroad should contact their German mission if they have any questions about the rules that apply to them.
Modern nationality law (information from the Federal Ministry of the Interior)
Websites of the German missions abroad
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier: “I’m delighted that our initiative (...) was adopted unanimously.
Germany’s UN Ambassador Peter Wittig had already stressed during the preceding consultations in the UN Human Rights Committee that the resolution made it clear that “unlawful and arbitrary surveillance” could infringe the rights to privacy and freedom of expression.
Germany in the United Nations
The Act was further revised with the entry into force of the main part of the Immigration Act (Zuwanderungsgesetz) on 1 January 2005 and its further provisions on 28 August 2007.
They must however decide between the ages of 18 and 23 whether to retain their German nationality or the nationality of their parents.
Pursuant to section 7 of the Nationality Act, repatriates returning to Germany in or after 1993 automatically acquire German nationality upon receipt of the papers issued under section 15 of the Federal Expellees Act after they arrive in Germany.
The only exceptions to this rule are if the child would otherwise be stateless or if the German parent(s) register(s) the birth with the German mission responsible for where they live within one year of the birth of the child (section 4 (4) of the Nationality Act).
People who have lost their German nationality by choosing to acquire a foreign nationality (section 25 of the Nationality Act) can now re-acquire their German nationality more easily provided they fulfil certain conditions; the opinion of the local German mission abroad carries considerable weight (section 13 of the Nationality Act).
Foreigners can also be naturalised whilst living abroad, provided they have special ties with Germany to justify it (section 14 of the Nationality Act).
relations better than ever
Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s first official visit focused on cooperation within the Weimar Triangle alongside bilateral topics.
Another priority was the situation in Ukraine.
Just the two of them: Steinmeier and Sikorski
Bild: Foreign Minister Steinmeier speaking to Poland’s president Komorowski
During his first official visit to Warsaw, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier focused on cooperation within the Weimar Triangle alongside bilateral topics.
Another priority in the discussions was the situation in Ukraine.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier arrived in the capital of Poland in the afternoon –
during his first official visit to Germany’s eastern neighbour political talks with President Bronisław Komorowski and Foreign Minister Radosław Sikorski were on the agenda.
They discussed the status and further enhancement of bilateral relations.
Before his departure for Warsaw, Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement:
Relations between Berlin and Warsaw have never been as good as they are today.
I would like to further expand our partnership, and do so together with our French partners.
Solid collaboration within the Weimar Triangle can provide a strong impetus to help shape Europe.
Revive and continue cooperation within the Weimar Triangle
Warm end to a joint press conference
Following the discussion with his counterpart Sikorski, both sides expressed how pleased they were to work together again,
"in a spirit of friendship (...) in the interest of both countries", summed up Steinmeier.
Following Steinmeier’s first official visit to Paris yesterday, the Foreign Ministers discussed future cooperation within the Weimar Triangle -
Foreign Minister Steinmeier considered that his discussions in Paris and Warsaw had reminded him of his obligation to revive and continue the good cooperation that existed within Weimar Triangle.
More on Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s first official visit to Paris
Poland, France and Germany have been linked by this trilateral cooperation since 1991.
Numerous joint projects have made a practical contribution to strengthening Europe.
More on cooperation within the Weimar Triangle
EU offer is still on the table
At the start of his trip, the German Foreign Minister stated that the European Union’s Eastern Partnership was of great importance to Germany and Poland.
"Therefore when we observe the situation in Ukraine today, we are concerned", said Steinmeier.
The Minister continued:
Part of my motive for travelling to Warsaw is to hold discussions with our Polish partners on how we can help Ukraine to push ahead with its European course of reforms, the course which it chose years ago and which so many people in Ukraine are bravely standing up for.
At the joint press conference with his Polish counterpart Sikorski, Steinmeier clearly stated "We have both said that the EU’s offer is still on the table. It is up to Ukraine to decide."
Steinmeier und Kwaśniewski in Warsaw
Foreign Minister Sikorski agreed with his German counterpart and added:
"The EU’s offer is also an offer to modernise Ukraine. We are prepared to help Ukraine with this process of modernisation".
This also seemed to be what the Ukrainian population was expecting, said Sikorski.
Later on in the evening, Foreign Minister Steinmeier met the former Polish President Aleksander Kwaśniewski in Warsaw.
As the European Parliament’s Special Envoy, Kwaśniewski was, together with the Irish Pat Cox, responsible for Ukraine and its progress towards the EU.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier in talks in Warsaw
The EU’s Eastern Partnership
First official visit to Warsaw
What then follows is a first official visit, but not a premiere:
on 19 December 2013, Steinmeier receives a warm welcome on landing in Poland.
The main issue discussed by the two men is the further expansion of bilateral relations between Germany and Poland.
Steinmeier already knows the Polish partners he will meet in the course of the afternoon from his first stint as Foreign Minister.
At a joint press conference, Steinmeier and Sikorski express their regret that the Ukrainian Government has rejected the association agreement with the European Union.
However, the two Foreign Ministers agree that the offer of an association agreement with the EU still stands.
First visitor since returning to office:
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier meets his Luxembourg counterpart Jean Asselborn for talks at the Federal Foreign Office in Berlin.
On 20 December Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier met his Luxembourg counterpart Jean Asselborn for talks at the Federal Foreign Office in Berlin.
Asselborn was the new German Foreign Minister's first official visitor since assuming office on 17 December.
Visit of a good friend
Asselborn and Steinmeier at their joint press conference at the Federal Foreign Office
Foreign Minister Steinmeier reported, among other things, on his recent visit to Poland and the situation in Ukraine.
Steinmeier and Asselborn being interviewed by a Luxembourg journalist
Alongside bilateral relations, the other main topic discussed during this visit is the situation in Ukraine.
They state that instead Ukraine has opted for an offer which seems more attractive in the short term:
In the same vein Foreign Minister Asselborn emphasized what close and friendly relations Germany and Luxembourg enjoyed.
Overcoming Europe’s crisis
In his statement Foreign Minister Steinmeier also made clear that the two ministers had discussed ways to overcome the current crisis in Europe.
It's sad to see that right now in Europe's Mediterranean countries young people appear to associate Europe more with crisis than with anything else.
Europe is viewed as a threat rather than as a hope for a better future.
To dispel this fear is our common goal and we’ll work together closely to this end.
Transatlantic School Project with Harald Leibrecht
The Coordinator of Transatlantic Cooperation in the Federal Foreign Office is interviewed by pupils at a school in Berlin.
Bild: Warning! Recording in progress – Harald Leibrecht being interviewed
What is your opinion of Edward Snowden?
What transatlantic programmes are there?
Why is the US eavesdropping on us?
Why is there so little healthy food in the US?
What is your personal relationship with the US?
Why are exchanges among young people so important to you?
Participants in the radio workshop on transatlantic relations put these and many more questions to the Coordinator of Transatlantic Cooperation.
Pupils from the 7th and 9th grades prepared the interview together, conducted it themselves and recorded it.
The Coordinator’s visit was part of the Transatlantic School Initiative run by Radijojo World’s Children’s Media Network.
As part of this, Radijojo is organising numerous radio workshops on transatlantic issues in schools on both sides of the Atlantic.
By the end of each workshop, the pupils have not only learnt a great deal about transatlantic cooperation but have produced a radio programme by themselves.
Bild: Group photo – Harald Leibrecht with pupils participating in the Transatlantic School Project
The pupils at the Georg Weerth high school arrived with so many good ideas that the one school period planned for the session was not nearly long enough.
Click here for more on the Transatlantic School Initiative as well as the full interview and photos of the visit.
The Federal Republic of Germany’s transatlantic programme supports the Transatlantic School Initiative with funds from the European Recovery Programme (ERP) of the Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Energy.
..
We must join forces, the German Foreign Minister continued, to make Europe once again what over the past 20 to 30 years it has clearly been for our generation:
More on bilateral relations between Germany and Luxembourg
The friendship between Jean Asselborn and myself is an expression of these good relations.
Even during my first stint as Foreign Minister, it was clear that Jean Asselborn exerted considerable influence on the debates in the Foreign Affairs Council.
And he became a friend over the course of the years.
Jean Asselborn recently gave you a bike as a present. What happened to it?
How much time do you have for your family?
It would be a mistake to assume that my time as chairman of the SPD parliamentary group was quiet.
Where did this idea come from?
Luxembourg Foreign Minister Asselborn
Foreign Minister Steinmeier was clearly delighted to see his Luxembourg counterpart and welcomed him as an "old friend who's well known in Germany".
At a working breakfast the two ministers first amicably discussed the development of bilateral relations over the years ahead as well as European affairs and current issues on the international agenda.
Another topic they discussed was relations with Russia.
The two ministers also exchanged views on the latest developments in the Middle East peace process and the negotiations with Iran on its nuclear programme.
After their talks Steinmeier and Asselborn gave a joint press conference.
When Willy Brandt explained that Germans wanted "to become a people of good neighbours", he was also talking about relations with Luxembourg, the German Foreign Minister pointed out.
This was "of course not just an economic crisis," he explained,
adding:
We want to be a people of good neighbours
an expression of hope, of confidence in the future we are building together and which has driven the European integration process forward.
Asselborn added that he greatly appreciated the importance the German Foreign Minister attached in European affairs to respect, solidarity and friendship with Germany's neighbours.
I thought that was such a sensible idea that I suggested we do something similar.
We have to take the scepticism towards Europe very seriously.
This is not only about economic issues but about much more, namely the alienation from Europe which reaches deep into the world of politics and society.
Lilongwe
Conclusion of private health insurance from 1 January 2010
Report No. 223M/2009 of 18 September 2009 – Ref.: Vw-1-104.46
In keeping with standard local practice the Embassy is hereby authorised, effective 1 January 2010, to take out private health insurance for local employees of the Embassy and their families (only spouses and children who are minors, documentary proof required), in the form of an “Executive Scheme” provided by the local insurer MASM.
In line with local norms, 95% of the cost of insurance contributions shall be taken on by the Embassy and shall be recorded under the relevant remuneration title.
5% shall be taken on by the local staff themselves and, according to what is practical and possible, shall be deducted from their remuneration payments either in one sum or in several instalments.
Due to the temporary financial pressures expected on Title 0503 42709 in 2010, the health insurance contract should be concluded early enough to allow the annual premium for 2010 to be allocated to the 2009 budget if at all possible (however this must not be taken to mean that the health insurance contract comes into effect early).
It is important to consider, however, that any local staff whose employment is to cease before the end of 2010 should only be allocated health insurance contributions on a pro-rata basis.
If local staff leave unexpectedly before the end of the 2010 statutory insurance year, a pro-rata refund of contributions must be agreed.
Co-signed by Divisions 103 and 106.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier congratulates Helmut Schmidt on his 95th birthday
Dear Helmut,
Congratulations on your 95th birthday!
I hope that we can count on your experience and advice for a long time to come.
On 19 December, Foreign Minister Steinmeier visited the Polish capital, where he met President Komorowski, Foreign Minister Sikorski and former Polish President Kwaśniewski.
Heading for a familiar destination: even before departing from Tegel airport, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier made it clear that relations between Berlin and Warsaw are now better than ever.
In Warsaw, which is decked out in Christmas lights, he first of all meets Poland’s President Borislaw Komorowski in Belvedere Palace.
He even has a personal friendship with Foreign Minister Radosław Sikorski.
O-Ton Steinmeier: … an offer pressed on Ukraine by Russia which can possibly prevent short-term payment difficulties and avert reforms but which will make Ukraine dependent in many spheres in the longer term.
O-Ton Steinmeier: At any rate, both of us have said that the European offer is still on the table.
It’s up to Ukraine to decide.
After the press conference, Sikorski hosts a dinner for the German guests – just a few doors along.
Later on in the evening, Steinmeier meets another old acquaintance at the German Ambassador’s residence:
He has travelled to Ukraine a total of 26 times as facilitator.
The situation in Ukraine will continue to play a key role in the German Foreign Minister’s talks.
Poland remains Germany’s close partner, not only on this issue – that much becomes clear during the five hours Steinmeier spends in Warsaw on his first official visit.
You served Germany as Federal Chancellor with success at a difficult time.
Germans still well remember your crisis management during the flood disaster in Hamburg in 1962 as well as your statesmanlike handling of the German Autumn of 1977.
You are a great model for us all, for me personally above all due to your interest and engagement in world affairs and your strategic farsightedness.
Minister of State Roth leaves for Greece
In Athens he is due to meet his counterpart, Dimitris Kourkoulas.
The talks are likely to focus on the situation in Greece, bilateral relations and the European priorities of the incoming EU Council presidency.
The emergence of anti-European parties in many countries is only a symptom.
In my own life, I have experienced Europe as a source of hope and confidence.
If far too many young people, especially in the South, regard Europe as a threat, then we have to act.
European integration is a unique success story.
Active and practical solidarity with Greece
Minister of State Roth
These achievements are the result of farsighted political decisions.
However, we then got caught up in a serious economic crisis which has also turned into a political crisis.
We are taking action together around the world.
We have reason to look to the coming year with greater confidence.
Minister of State Roth reaffirmed his belief that Europe would benefit from the Greek EU Council presidency starting in January.
The policy on Europe is largely a part of domestic policy at the European level.
However, the policy on Europe is also about looking at the bigger picture.
How can Europe remain strong and fit for the future?
For this very special occasion and for the coming year, I wish you health and happiness as well as a pleasant and enjoyable time with family and friends.
Where can we change track?
How can we improve?
The Foreign Ministers and our diplomats are the key players here.
You may rest assured that this will be a central element of my policy for the coming four years.
Jean was a very close partner in the field of foreign policy from the outset.
I really do use it.
That job also involves a great number of appointments, also in the evenings, talks and public appearances throughout Germany.
Unfortunately, therefore, my family is used to my not having much time for them.
My work in the Bundestag has made me aware of the fact that people here in Germany expect foreign policy to be explained to them.
My former Norwegian colleague Jonas Gahr Støre told me during the award ceremony for the Willy Brandt Prize how Norway subjected its foreign policy to a critical self-assessment.
Other countries have also done that.
How worried are you about scepticism towards Europe, or the rise of populist forces with an eye to the upcoming European Parliament elections in 2014?
The Acropolis in Athens
On 23 December Minister of State Roth leaves on his first visit to Greece since taking up his new post.
In Athens he is due to meet his counterpart, Deputy Foreign Minister Dimitris Kourkoulas.
Before leaving, Minister of State Roth said how pleased he was to be meeting his Greek counterpart so soon after taking up his new post.
We know what a hard time people are having and recognise what immense efforts were needed to achieve the progress made to date.
The European Union has political shortcomings.
It lacked the courage to take further-reaching political steps in good time, to control the markets effectively and to grow closer together.
Michael Roth, the new Minister of State for Europe, leaves on 23 December on his first visit to Greece since taking up his new post.
He felt it was very important, he added, to intensify German-Greek cooperation and support Greece’s successful endeavours to overcome the severe crisis in the country.
Germany will remain a reliable partner for Greece in all its future endeavours. It can count on our active and practical solidarity here, also in tackling the problem of dramatically high youth unemployment.
Which priorities would you like the EU to set so that it can better perform its role as a foreign and security policy player in future?
European diplomats are calling on Germany to pursue a more moderate European policy.
Have these appeals been heard in the Federal Foreign Office and how do you intend to live up to these demands in political terms?
People all over Europe must feel again that our cooperation offers genuine value-added for a prosperous future.
The changes in the world have led to anxiety, while the crisis in Europe has made the limits of the old models painfully clear to many.
However, the first hopeful signs that we are overcoming the crisis are now visible.
In the course of this process, we Germans want to stress once more what we consider to be the core of the European Union: understanding and confidence.
How big a say does the Federal Foreign Office have in the policy on Europe today when one considers that Chancellor Merkel and Finance Minister Schäuble have taken over key areas of European policy in the last few years?
The Finance Ministers are still busy rectifying earlier mistakes in the construction of the single currency.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier on attacks against Christians in Baghdad
Foreign Minister Steinmeier on the situation in South Sudan
Foreign Minister Steinmeier today (25 December) issued the following statement on the bloody attacks against members of the Christian minority in Iraq:
The news from South Sudan is grim.
I utterly condemn the use of terrorist violence against members of religious minorities in Iraq.
I therefore welcome the decision of the United Nations Security Council to substantially increase the number of blue helmets serving in the country.
The international community is taking action.
What is crucial now is to prevent the clashes turning into an ethnically motivated civil war engulfing the whole country.
Behind the scenes:
The Treaty Archives
“Reforms and competitiveness, solidarity and growth”
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier in an interview with the Luxemburger Tageblatt newspaper on Germany’s policy on Europe. Published on 23 December 2013
Dr Steinmeier, how would you describe bilateral relations between Luxembourg and Germany?
They couldn’t be better.
If there are two states in Europe which have a good understanding at all political levels then it’s Luxembourg and Germany.
You talk of your friendship: how would you describe Jean Asselborn as a person?
If he wasn’t there, he would have to be created (laughs).
For he doesn’t simply promote his own country’s interests.
He’s also concerned about the fate of people in North Africa, the Middle East or in Afghanistan.
Every time I go on a bike trip, I report back on how far I’ve just ridden and at what speed (laughs).
In your new office, you shoulder great responsibility and have a busy schedule.
I’ve already said that nothing much will change.
You’ve said you intend to launch a “process of internal reflection on German foreign policy’s future prospects”, which is to take place in a dialogue with civil society and academia.
It’s a great advantage to know the Federal Foreign Office and the ins and outs of foreign policy when taking over the helm again after a four-year break.
During his visit to Berlin, I had an in-depth discussion with Jean Asselborn about how we can tackle the European crisis.
What’s your assessment of the state of European integration and how much more integration should be achieved in Europe?
Freedom of movement and travel, the single market as well as the single currency are regarded as a given but they didn’t happen as a matter of course.
We mustn’t make do with simply managing the crisis.
That’s necessary but not enough.
Europe’s foreign and security policy is better than its reputation.
We have shouldered joint responsibility in stabilising the Balkans, in combating piracy off Africa’s coasts, in preventing weapons smuggling off the coast of Lebanon. We’re making use of the broad range of European instruments – both military and civilian – in Mali and elsewhere in Africa.
However, we can – and indeed must – do better.
Anyone keen to strengthen Europe’s place in the world, to defend our values and safeguard our interests, will realise that Europe’s foreign and security policy has to be vigorously continued.
We’re going to work on that now.
The Frenchman Laurent Fabius calls this making it possible for Europeans to love Europe again, while Jean Asselborn of Luxembourg is calling for less censure and more understanding.
There are indications that the worst of the economic crisis is now behind us, even though the outlook for growth in many parts of Europe isn’t yet sufficiently stable.
Reforms and competitiveness, solidarity and growth – we have to keep on fighting for these.
The day-to-day work in the European Union is a task for the entire Federal Government, not of any individual department.
This task is usually not spectacular but necessary.
What’s gone wrong?
Finding answers to these questions, to our strategic challenges, building the Europe of the future is, as it were, the task par excellence within the policy on Europe.
Here you can admire magnificent velvet bindings or the gleaming boxes used to store seals.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier issued the following statement in Berlin today on the situation in South Sudan:
When the young state was founded less than two years ago, there were great hopes for peaceful development. The reality in Juba is very different, unfortunately.
Germany strongly supports international efforts, above all those being undertaken by our African partners, to defuse the situation and is providing political, humanitarian and development assistance to this end.
In this dangerous situation I am very pleased that, thanks to sterling work by the Bundeswehr, over the past few days all German nationals have been flown to safety.
To everyone involved in the evacuation I offer my thanks.
The situation in Iraq is becoming no easier.
And the continuing civil war in neighbouring Syria, with all its extreme brutality, is further increasing the instability in the country.
Numerous people were killed or severely injured in attacks on members of the Christian minority in the capital Baghdad today.
It is appalling that the perpetrators will stop at nothing, not even at carrying out bloody attacks against Christians on Christmas Day.
It is therefore all the more important that Prime Minister Maliki's Government meet its responsibility to protect all minorities in the country and to tackle terrorism and violence with every determination.
The Political Archive has the originals of all Germany’s international treaties.
Why not peep over the shoulders of the white-gloved archivists at work....
In Athens he met his counterpart, Dimitris Kourkoulas.
Europe is a community of shared values, an economic union and a union of solidarity
Minister of State Roth (l.) and his counterpart Kourkoulas
Still in harness the day before Christmas Eve:
In Athens he met his Greek counterpart, Deputy Foreign Minister Dimitris Kourkoulas.
Greece will take over the presidency from Lithuania on 1 January 2014.
Following the visit, Minister of State Roth reaffirmed that he regards Europe as a community of shared values, an economic union and a union of solidarity.
Kourkoulas and Roth
Before leaving Germany, Michael Roth said how pleased he was to be meeting his Greek counterpart so soon after taking up his new post.
Michael Roth, the new Minister of State for Europe, left on 23 December for his first visit to Greece since taking up his new post.
Minister of State Michael Roth left on 23 December for his first visit to Greece since taking up his new post.
Their talks focused on the situation in Greece, bilateral relations and the European priorities of the incoming EU Council presidency.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier on mediation efforts in South Sudan
Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement in Berlin today (27 December):
Just a few years ago the international community supported South Sudan in its efforts to achieve independence by peaceful means.
After many years of armed conflict between North and South, this was a great step forward and awakened huge hopes.
South Sudan’s leaders are now jointly responsible for ensuring that their young and newly independent country does not sink into chaos and misery.
This means that neither of the two sides may stand aloof from the efforts of their African neighbours to mediate in the conflict.
The slaughter must stop!
Crucial to support mediation efforts
Foreign Minister Steinmeier has appealed to South Sudan's leaders not to stand aloof from African mediation efforts.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier has warned of the danger of civil war and appealed to South Sudan's leaders not to stand aloof from African mediation efforts.
Water for refugees in South Sudan
Government and rebel troops are fighting for control over several strategically important towns in the oil-rich provinces, thousands of people have fled their homes.
Members of the country's two largest tribes, the Dinka and the Nuer, are reported to be behind a growing wave of ethnic cleansing.
According to UN figures, some 90,000 people have now fled their homes.
African mediation efforts
Recently the Presidents of Kenya and Ethiopia arrived in Juba, the South Sudanese capital, to mediate between President Salva Kiir and his rival, the dismissed former Vice-President Rieck Machar.
Machar had failed to attend a first round of talks between the three presidents and called for negotiations to be held in the Ethiopian capital of Addis Ababa.
Federal Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier
Against this backdrop Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier recalled what high hopes the international community had had a few years before at the time of South Sudan’s independence.
More UNMISS peacekeepers
South Sudanese refugees seek shelter in the UNMISS base
Foreign Minister Steinmeier condemns the attack in the centre of Beirut
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier issued the following statement today (27 December) on the attack on Lebanese politicians in Beirut:
The attack appears to have targeted those who are striving to hold the country together.
I condemn this act of terrorism in the strongest terms.
I call on all political forces in Lebanon to pursue the path of political dialogue and to prevent the country from descending into a spiral of violence.
The instability caused by the Syrian civil war cannot be allowed to upset the fragile balance of power in Lebanon.
Therefore progress towards forming a functioning government is urgently needed.
According to the latest reports, the former Minister of Finance Mohamad Chatah and at least four others were killed in the attack which took place this morning.
The latest injury count stands at 71.
Mohamad Chatah made an important contribution to shaping the policies of the Mustaqbal party.
The Mustaqbal ("Future Movement") party is currently the largest in the Lebanese parliament.
On 28 November 2013 the German Bundestag had approved an extension of Germany’s participation in UNMISS until 31 December 2014.
Crucial to prevent civil war
German support for South Sudan
In addition to its UNMISS funding and peacekeepers, Germany supports South Sudan mainly through bilateral development cooperation.
Priority areas are the municipal water sector, administrative reform and decentralisation, food security, agriculture and peace work.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier on mediation efforts in South Sudan (27 December 2013)
Foreign Minister Steinmeier on the situation in South Sudan (24 December 2013)
Click here for more information on the latest developments in and German assistance for Sudan and South Sudan
Corruption prevention at the Federal Foreign Office
Corruption is a complex and covert phenomenon which in today's interconnected world causes great material damage as well as a loss of public trust.
Corruption in government compromises the reputation of the civil service and erodes confidence in the impartiality, objectivity and integrity of public officials.
Over Christmas the situation in South Sudan has further escalated.
Fighting between government and rebel troops continues in five of South Sudan's ten provinces.
"South Sudan’s leaders are now jointly responsible," he added, "for ensuring that their young and newly independent country does not sink into chaos and misery.
On 24 December the UN Security Council approved an increase in the number of blue helmets serving with UNMISS, the UN peace mission in South Sudan, from currently 7000 to 11,500.
These twelve German soldiers deployed with UNMISS in South Sudan are helping to stabilize the situation there.
Already on 20 December the Bundeswehr had flown 98 German and other European nationals out of Juba.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier offers Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov condolences following the attacks in Volgograd
This morning Frank-Walter Steinmeier spoke on the phone to Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov and afterwards issued the following statement:
We condemn these vile acts of terrorism in the strongest possible terms.
To all who have been injured I wish a speedy recovery.
“The two attacks in Volgograd that have caused so many deaths and casualties are appalling news.
I have conveyed to Sergey Lavrov our sorrow and deep sympathy for the families who have lost loved ones.
Those behind these attacks must be called to account.”
Corruption does harm
corruption is a crime that must be rejected, from street corners to corporate boardrooms.
Many billions of dollars are lost annually to corruption.
The FFO’s internal rules are intended to flesh out the Directive's provisions and provide guidance for all FFO staff.
If you have any questions about corruption prevention or wish to notify a suspected case of corruption in the FFO, please call
We will be glad to provide any assistance or advice we can.
Head of Internal Auditing.
Recalling the dire global consequences of corruption, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon issued the following warning on the eve of this year's International Anti-Corruption Day on 9 December:
Corruption should no longer be seen as the regrettable price of doing business;
Its impact – from arms smuggling and human trafficking to the trade in endangered species and the bribes that undermine governance and the rule of law – is devastating and corrosive.
The legal basis for the efforts of all federal officials to prevent corruption is the Federal Government Directive of 30 July 2004 concerning the Prevention of Corruption in the Federal Administration (Anti-Corruption Directive).
Throughout the Federal Foreign Office (FFO) corruption prevention is an important priority.
The FFO Commissioner for Corruption Prevention and her team are committed to the rigorous application of the Anti-Corruption Directive.
Dr Heike Fuller is corruption prevention contact point for all FFO staff as well as members of the public.
to the Commissioner for Corruption Prevention and her team.
Dr Heike Fuller
Commissioner for Corruption Prevention,
or send our contact form
Federal Foreign Office supporting confidence- and security-building measures in Latin America
Soldier in Ecuador
Support for African mediation efforts
Following heavy fighting in the past few days, initial peace talks between the two parties to the conflict in South Sudan are due to begin in the Ethiopian capital of Addis Ababa.
Another focus of the project is to train women in the judiciary and police forces.
Armed violence is one of the major challenges facing many states in Central America.
The murder rates in some countries in the region are amongst the highest in the world.
Besides being tragic for the victims and their families, armed violence is a huge obstacle to development.
Ahead of planned peace talks between the South Sudanese Government and rebel forces loyal to former Vice-President Riek Machar, the situation has continued to escalate.
Government and rebel forces are fighting for control over several strategically important towns in the oil-rich provinces, thousands of people have fled their homes.
Fighting continues to rage around the Jonglei State capital of Bor, which was seized by rebel troops a few days ago.
At the same time efforts to mediate in the conflict are proceeding apace.
The Presidents of Kenya and Ethiopia were recently in Juba, the South Sudanese capital, in a bid to mediate between President Kiir and the rebels.
As a result, both parties to the conflict have now sent negotiating teams to Addis Ababa, where peace talks are due to begin under the auspices of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), an East African regional organisation.
Germany is supporting the African mediation efforts now under way.
Germany promoting development and implementation of international standards for the control of small arms
The project aims to develop training options and support the introduction of the software in developing countries and international organisations.
The project is being implemented by the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research (UNIDIR) based in Geneva and the Monterey Institute of International Studies.
The development of an application with indicators for the control of small arms means a long-lamented gap in the tools available for small arms control is being closed.
He had previously appealed to South Sudan’s leaders to live up to their responsibility for their country:
After four years of work on their development, the International Small Arms Control Standards (ISACS) were presented in August 2012.
Up to 300 experts, including several Germans, were involved in developing this compendium for small arms control.
Using ISACS, it will in future be possible to devise indicators and benchmarks for small arms control, thus helping states assess and improve their actions at national level in this field.
The twelve German peacekeepers currently deployed with UNMISS in South Sudan are helping to stabilize the situation there.
Priority areas are the municipal water sector, administrative reform and decentralisation, food security, agriculture and peace work.
The new software makes all this possible.
Externer Link, öffnet in neuem FensterClick here for more information on the latest developments in and German assistance for Sudan and South Sudan
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier has welcomed the African efforts under way to “end the slaughter in South Sudan”.
On New Year’s Day South Sudanese President Salva Kiir declared a state of emergency in Jonglei and Unity States, the scene of the heaviest fighting in recent weeks.
On 2 January Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement in this connection:
We support the efforts being undertaken by the Africans to end the slaughter in South Sudan.
I am very pleased to see how intensively African regional organisations are working for a peaceful solution here.
It must be impressed on the South Sudanese Government and the rebels in Addis Ababa that they have a great responsibility to resolve their disputes by peaceful means.
The German ambassador has returned to Juba in order to keep a close watch on developments and support the ongoing mediation efforts.
Federal Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier Against this backdrop Foreign Minister Steinmeier recalled what high hopes the international community had had a few years before at the time of South Sudan’s independence.
“It would be a tragedy,” he added, “if the freedom and independence achieved two years ago were now to be sacrificed in a bloody civil war.”
South Sudanese refugees seek shelter in the UNMISS base In the light of the fighting in South Sudan, the UN Security Council had on 24 December approved an increase in the number of blue helmets serving with UNMISS, the UN peace mission in South Sudan, from currently 7000 to 11,500.
The mission’s purpose is to support the Government of South Sudan in consolidating peace, including by promoting state building and economic development on a more long-term basis.
On 28 November 2013 the German Bundestag had approved an extension of Germany’s participation in UNMISS until 31 December 2014.
Germany supports UNMISS both through its contribution to the UN’s peacekeeping budget as well as by funding the German peacekeepers serving with UNMISS.
On 24 December Foreign Minister Steinmeier welcomed the increase in the number of UNMISS peacekeepers, warning that there was a danger the conflict could further escalate:
At the German-South Sudanese intergovernmental consultations held in Juba in July 2013 Germany pledged 29.5 million euros for development projects in these areas.
In 2013 it also provided 9 million euros in humanitarian aid for the country.
Externer Link, öffnet in neuem FensterForeign Minister Steinmeier on mediation efforts in South Sudan (27 December 2013)
Externer Link, öffnet in neuem FensterForeign Minister Steinmeier on the situation in South Sudan (24 December 2013)
The project will be carried out in close coordination with the Central American Integration System (SICA) and is part of the Security Strategy for Central America.
The series of seminars and further-training courses to be held in several Central American states as well as Mexico, will also come up with recommendations for policy-making and legislation.
Preparations for the future Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) play an important role here. The steps help, for example, to develop an end-user certificate for arms exports which meets international standards and regulations.
The seminars will be planned and run by the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America and the Caribbean (UNLIREC), which is based in Lima.
In 2013 and 2014, Germany is continuing to support small arms control by leading training and seminars in some of the countries in the world most affected by armed violence in Central America.
The current follow-on project provides funding of 220,000 euros.
In 2014, Germany is promoting the implementation of the software tool to apply the International Small Arms Control Standards (ISACS) with funding to the tune of 236,000 euros.
Having promoted the first two phases (development in 2012, piloting in 2013), Germany has thus invested a total of 450,000 euros in the development, spread and application of the standards.
In turn this makes the Small Arms Programme of Action operational.
Donor states now have a way of checking the implementation criteria of the Small Arms Programme of Action, the International Tracing Instrument and the UN Firearms Protocol, while developing countries and industrialised nations alike have an instrument with which to identify potential shortcomings in their own policies.
In 2012, Germany provided support for the Central American states to the tune of 200,000 euros to fund further training for decision-makers in the police force and judicial systems in handling violent crime and in dealing with firearms and munitions as they endeavour to combat crime.
are you following us yet?
In addition to this, others have accounts on the video platform Youtube, as well as much more.
The Federal Foreign Office in conversation online
In turn, in China our missions abroad are in close contact with the public via two microblogs.
Changing perspectives
alongside information about Germany, they offer a lively portrayal of everyday life in the host country.
The Federal Foreign Office’s Facebook page made this the topic of its series "changing perspectives".
Approximately once a month
a mission abroad introduces itself
and sends a photo enabling users to "look out of the window", for example at the capital city from within the embassy.
What is currently on offer?
The #Freitagsfrage on Facebook -
what is this seal?
This time it is:
For more information on this and for the answer, click here:
As for changing perspectives,
on Twitter our colleagues in New York have posted a snapshot of their snowy city: Externer Link, öffnet in neuem Fenster@GermanyUN
If you would like to learn more about a German-Tunisian civil defence project then click here for information provided by the German Embassy in Tunisia:
Externer Link, öffnet in neuem Fensterthe Facebook page of the Embassy in Tunis.
Another recommendation -
And click here to read today’s tweets on Europe and South Sudan posted on the Federal Foreign Office’s German Twitter account Externer Link, öffnet in neuem Fenster@AuswaertigesAmt
So in short,
you can follow us no matter where you are!
The Federal Foreign Office online –
Federal Foreign Office 2.0 –
The Federal Foreign Office has a presence worldwide through just under 230 missions abroad.
But nowadays, the headquarters in Berlin and ever more embassies and consulates also have a home in the digital world.
but this is not all –
nowadays the Federal Foreign Office in Berlin and ever more embassies and consulates also have a home in the digital world.
More than 70 missions abroad have opened a virtual embassy on Facebook whilst around 25 are already active on Twitter.
Important contact points – including on Web 2.0
There are regional differences.
As Tunisians are often active on social networking sites, our Embassy provides them with a wide range of options both on Twitter and Facebook.
The German Embassy in Beijing already has 90,000 followers on its "Weibo" site, the same number again follow the Embassy on "QQ".
Embassies and consulates remain an important point of contact – in the real world just as much as online.
Informing the public about the work of the Federal Foreign Office and the missions abroad is the focus of their presence on social media, as is dialogue with users.
One reason for its success is the variety of languages used.
For example, the Federal Foreign Office runs one Twitter account in German and another in English, and missions abroad often run their social media presence in the local language.
Around 25 missions are already on Twitter –
this is the FFO's English twitter account.
Yet messages posted on Twitter and co. can also be of interest to people in Germany –
The latest #Freitagsfrage ("Fridayquestion") appears on the Federal Foreign Office Facebook page today.
on the Federal Foreign Office’s Youtube channel you will find a short film on the Treaty Archives of the Federal Foreign Office, entitled Externer Link, öffnet in neuem Fenster"Siegeldosen und Samteinbände" (seal containers and velvet covers)
The Federal Foreign Office and the missions abroad on Web 2.0 (last updated on 3 January 2014) (PDF, 6 KB)
Federal Foreign Office increases humanitarian aid for South Sudan
In this connection Foreign Minister Steinmeier commented today (6 January) as follows:
At the very least, both sides must guarantee unhindered humanitarian access to the areas under their control.
Europe is very important
European flags
This early visit to Brussels underlines the great importance that Germany attaches to the process of European integration.
In his discussion with Luxembourg’s Foreign Minister Asselborn back in December, Steinmeier had already highlighted that joint efforts had to be undertaken to ensure that Europe once again became an “expression of hope” and an “expression of confidence”.
Europe is very important
Particular emphasis will be on the upcoming European Parliament elections in May 2014.
These will focus on further developing existing good bilateral relations.
First visitor since returning to office: Foreign Minister Steinmeier receives his counterpart from Luxembourg
In view of the critical security situation, aid workers trying to organise and deliver relief on the ground face a difficult and dangerous task.
This means both Africa and the international community will have to increase the pressure.
The international humanitarian relief effort can be stepped up as soon as there is safe and reliable access to the refugees.
The Federal Foreign Office has provided Welthungerhilfe with an initial 495,000 euros to supply humanitarian aid to the basic needs of people in South Sudan driven from their homes by the current fighting in the country.
Given the delaying tactics right now in Addis Ababa, it looks as if neither side is really interested in a quick political solution to the conflict.
Recent weeks have seen a big rise in the number of internally displaced persons.
At the start of the week, Foreign Minister Steinmeier is travelling to the Belgian capital for discussions with the top officials of the European institutions as well as Belgian Foreign Minister Reynders, the first since his return to office.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier is travelling to Brussels today for his first official visit since returning to office.
On Monday and Tuesday he will meet the top officials of the European institutions.
Moreover Steinmeier will meet his Belgian counterpart Didier Reynders for political discussions.
As part of a series of first official visits, the German Foreign Minister will embark on his first trip of the new year this afternoon.
It is taking him to the capital of Belgium, where until Tuesday afternoon, he will have the chance to exchange views with representatives from the country as well as from the European Union.
Beforehand, Martin Schäfer, the Federal Foreign Office Spokesperson, stated,
"by visiting Brussels at this early stage, Foreign Minister Steinmeier would like to underline the great importance that Germany attaches to Europe and the process of European integration.”
After arriving, the Foreign Minister will first meet the President of the European Commission, José Manuel Barroso.
Over the course of his visit, discussions with the President of the European Parliament, Martin Schulz, the President of the European Council, Herman Van Rompuy, and the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Catherine Ashton, are also on the agenda.
The discussions will above all focus on the process of European integration and shaping the future of Europe.
In addition to this, Foreign Minister Steinmeier will meet the Belgian Minister of Foreign Affairs and Deputy Prime Minister, Didier Reynders, for talks on Tuesday.
Europe is a source of hope for the future
Foreign Minister Steinmeier travelled to the Belgian capital on Monday for discussions with the top officials of the European institutions and Belgian Foreign Minister Reynders, the first since his return to office.
Steinmeier and Barroso
At the beginning of the year, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier travelled to Brussels to meet with the top officials of the European institutions.
On Monday, he met the President of the European Commission, José Manuel Barroso, and further talks are planned for Tuesday.
According to Steinmeier, this early visit to Brussels, at the beginning of January and shortly after his return to office, clearly signals the Federal Government’s commitment to the process of European integration.
Directly after arriving in the Belgian capital, Frank-Walter Steinmeier met the President of the European Commission, José Manuel Barroso.
More than a common currency
After his discussion with Barroso, Steinmeier stated that it was no coincidence that his first trip of the year had taken him to the Belgian capital:
This is no coincidence of scheduling but a statement by the Federal Government.
We want to say
2014, moreover, marks the centenary of the outbreak of the First World War.
We want to say that for us, Europe is not one of many options, but the result of the lesson learnt from German history as well as a source of hope for the future.
In this year in particular, it should be remembered that Europe was more than just a common currency and an internal market, the German Foreign Minister continued.
We Germans should be very aware of this responsibility and we should channel all of our efforts into overcoming the European crisis which has dominated in recent years.
Focus on integration and Europe’s future
Press conference in Brussels
From now until Tuesday afternoon, Frank-Walter Steinmeier will have the chance in Brussels to exchange views with representatives from the country as well as from the European Union.
The discussions will above all focus on the process of European integration and shaping the future of Europe,
They will focus on further developing existing good bilateral relations.
The agenda for the remainder of his visit includes discussions with the President of the European Parliament, Martin Schulz, the President of the European Council, Herman Van Rompuy, and the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Catherine Ashton.
In addition to this, Foreign Minister Steinmeier will meet the Belgian Minister of Foreign Affairs and Deputy Prime Minister, Didier Reynders, for talks on Tuesday.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier receives his counterpart from Luxembourg
Europe is a source of hope for the future Foreign Minister Steinmeier travelled to the Belgian capital for discussions with the top officials of the European institutions and Belgian Foreign Minister Reynders, the first since his return to office.
On Monday, he met the President of the European Commission, José Manuel Barroso, and further talks will take place on Tuesday.
The remainder of his visit will include discussions with the President of the European Parliament, Martin Schulz, the President of the European Council, Herman Van Rompuy, and the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Catherine Ashton.
Press conference with Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Reynders
The focus of the discussions is above all on the process of European integration and shaping the future of Europe,
In addition to this, Foreign Minister Steinmeier met the Belgian Minister of Foreign Affairs and Deputy Prime Minister, Didier Reynders, for talks on Tuesday morning.
Their discussion focused on further developing existing good bilateral relations.
Visit to Brussels –
At the beginning of the year, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier travelled to Brussels to meet with the top officials of the European institutions.
Their discussion focused on the economic situation in the European Union (EU) and Greece’s assumption of the Presidency of the Council of the European Union on 1 January.
Further topics comprised the upcoming EU Summits on Russia and Africa.
with particular emphasis on the upcoming European Parliament elections in May 2014.
The Federal Government has noted with regret the circumstances surrounding the parliamentary elections in Bangladesh.
These elections are an extremely poor reflection of the electorate’s will.
We condemn the violence that surrounded the elections and call upon all political forces to refrain from any form of violence and intimidation, especially against religious minorities.
Promoting the European idea
Steinmeier and Schulz
Particularly in the run-up to the European Parliament elections in May 2014, Germany wanted to stand up for the European idea, the Foreign Minister continued:
but that it once again brings hope, above all to the young generation in the European Union’s southern countries, and is not seen as a kind of threat.
This is not merely something that we have promised each other, but something we will work for, both before and after the European elections.
Press conference with Foreign Minister Steinmeier and President of the EU Parliament Schulz
Steinmeier and Ashton greet each other
Integration and Europe’s future
Afterwards, Steinmeier met the President of the European Council, Herman Van Rompuy, as well as the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs, Catherine Ashton.
Bilateral relations with Belgium
Steinmeier had previously met the Belgian Minister of Foreign Affairs and Deputy Prime Minister, Didier Reynders, at Egmont Palace in order to discuss further developing the good bilateral relations which exist between Belgium and Germany.
Both Foreign Ministers announced their desire to continue their talks on 17 February when the King and Queen of Belgium will be visiting Berlin.
On this occasion, Steinmeier and Reynders will open a conference aiming to enhance connections between the two countries’ civil societies.
In the new year, the German Foreign Minister will tackle this work together with his European partners and by doing so is clearly signalling that Europe occupies a central place on Germany’s foreign policy agenda.
Externer Link, öffnet in neuem FensterBilateral relations between Belgium and Germany
Externer Link, öffnet in neuem FensterGermany in the EU
Externer Link, öffnet in neuem FensterThe value of Europe
Elections in Bangladesh extremely poor reflection of electorate’s will
Today (7 January), a Federal Foreign Office spokesperson issued the following statement in Berlin:
The number of people killed or injured during the campaign and on the election day itself is appallingly high.
The Federal Government urges the Bangladesh Government and all political parties to overcome their differences in the interest of the country and to work together to bring about inclusive, peaceful and credible democratic elections.
On 7 January, Foreign Minister Steinmeier met further representatives of the European Union.
Following his morning meeting with the President of the European Parliament, Martin Schulz, Steinmeier reiterated Germany’s commitment to the process of European integration.
[Martin Schulz and I] have promised each other that we want to ensure that we do not lose sight of the European idea amidst our long-term efforts to manage the crisis,
Both of these discussions also focused on the process of European integration and shaping Europe’s future.
Steinmeier concluded his visit to Egmont Palace with the words,
Swedish Foreign Minister visits Berlin
Minister of State Michael Roth appointed Commissioner for Franco-German Cooperation
Foreign Minister Steinmeier has met his Swedish counterpart, Carl Bildt, in Berlin.
Swedish Foreign Minister visits Berlin
Steinmeier and Bildt at the press conference
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier met Swedish Foreign Minister Carl Bildt for talks in Berlin on Wednesday.
Steinmeier thereby extended a “very warm welcome to an old colleague and friend”.
Michael Roth, Minister of State at the Federal Foreign Office, was appointed Commissioner for Franco-German Cooperation by the Federal Cabinet today (8 January 2014).
Their talks concentrated primarily on the international agenda: Syria, Iran and the Middle East.
The international agenda of their discussions focused on a number of trouble spots, namely Iran, Syria and the Middle East.
Minister of State issued the following statement to mark his appointment:
A close partnership based on mutual trust between Germany and France is essential if Europe is to move forward.
I agree with my French colleague Thierry Repentin that it is especially important in this anniversary year to bring home to people that
Europe is more than just the euro and crisis management.
Further information:
Excellent bilateral relations
The Commissioners are both assisted by a Deputy Commissioner on exchange from the Foreign Ministry of the other country.
Minister of State Roth is thus now responsible for coordinating Franco-German cooperation at governmental level and will seek to ensure close coordination with France in both bilateral and European issues.
Another key focus of his work will be furthering civil-society, regional and cross-border cooperation between the two countries.
The two Foreign Ministers were unequivocal in agreeing that German-Swedish relations had taken up very little of today’s discussions,
Above all, Europe is a community of shared values and solidarity.
as they were already excellent both at the political and at the personal level.
The chief focus during today’s talks was therefore on international issues.
On the French side, Thierry Repentin, the Minister Delegate for European Affairs at the French Foreign Ministry, has been responsible for Franco-German relations since March 2013.
Both Ministers spoke extensively about the war in Syria and the international negotiations on the Iranian nuclear programme.
Press conference with Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Bildt
An appeal to the opposition
Bildt: An “old colleague and friend” in Berlin
On Syria, Foreign Minister Steinmeier raised the sobering point that people were still being murdered and the situation was becoming increasingly complex, not least due to the infighting within the opposition.
He called for care to be taken to improve conditions in refugee camps.
He also pointed out the need to support Jordan and Lebanon, neighbouring countries which are under pressure from the high numbers of refugees.
Speaking about the planned Syria Conference, the German Foreign Minister expressed his hope that it would in fact take place but also sought to rein in expectations:
I hope it takes place – in a format that at least allows for the hope that progress will be made.
That format must involve the participation of important sections of the opposition in the Syria Conference.
We therefore call on the still hesitant sections of the opposition not to refuse to join the discussions, at least to take part, (...) because initial steps need to be taken now to perhaps make it possible to create small openings for humanitarian access and make minimal improvements in the humanitarian situation for the civilians suffering in Syria.
Swedish Foreign Minister Carl Bildt principally spoke about the situation of Syrian refugees:
We can be proud of the fact that Germany and Sweden are taking in large numbers of refugees.
Turning to the subject of Iran, Steinmeier spoke about the current negotiations on the Iranian nuclear programme.
Hopes of containing danger
The most recent progress made, he said, allowed for the hope that the “danger which could break out in the Middle East any day” could be “contained to some extent” and that a conclusive solution could be found.
This is truer than ever in 2014.
This year we are commemorating crucial historical events: the centenary of the start of the First World War and the 75th anniversary of the outbreak of the Second World War.
2014 also marks the 25th anniversary of the peaceful revolutions in Central and Eastern Europe which brought us Europeans back together again.
We want to work together to map out the way ahead.
Michael Roth’s very first trip abroad as Minister of State on 18 December 2013 took him to Paris where he met his counterpart, Thierry Repentin.
The next Franco-German intergovernmental consultations, due to take place in Paris on 19 February 2014, will be an important forthcoming event on our bilateral agenda.
At the start of their joint press conference, Foreign Minister Steinmeier made clear that, “with the state the world is in, we have to talk about the important conflict regions”.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier ended with a few words on today’s decision by the Federal Government to propose to the German Bundestag that it extend Germany’s participation in the Patriot mission under NATO and in the NATO mission Operation Active Endeavour.
Germany's contribution to the OPCW-UN mission in Syria
Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement today (9 January):
Defence Minister von der Leyen issued the following statement today (9 January):
Germany has safe technology and many years of experience with the destruction of the residuals of chemical warfare agents.
GEKA works on behalf of the Federal Government.
The Federal Ministry of Defence is the sole stakeholder.
The substances, hydrolysates, are incinerated in a tried and tested process in line with all environmental standards.
Germany is thus continuing its active support for the work done by OPCW:
The German Government is willing and able to destroy the residuals generated by the irreversible neutralisation of chemical warfare agents from Syria, which are similar to industrial waste, in Germany.
"The destruction of chemical weapons could mark the first decisive step towards defusing the conflict in Syria.
As, contrary to what many had expected, Syrian chemical weapons could be quickly identified, secured and removed, the international community has an obligation to ensure they are destroyed.
No-one who takes their international responsibility seriously can refuse to live up to this obligation.
That also applies to our country, as we have fully developed technical facilities for destroying chemical substances.
It is especially important that agreements are honoured for we are facing the next stage in difficult negotiations and it is essential that the reliability of the international community's pledges is beyond doubt."
"Advancing the peace process in Syria is an extraordinary international effort towards which many countries have already pledged their commitment.
The practical implementation will be carried out in Munster, Lower Saxony, by GEKA, the state-owned company responsible for disposing of chemical warfare agents.
Germany has to date made available 5 million euros for the OPCW Special Trust Fund for the Destruction of Syrian Chemical Weapons, provided further training for OPCW inspectors and flown them to Syria for inspections.
In response to a request from the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), the German Government has decided that Germany will make a substantial contribution towards the destruction of Syrian chemical weapons.
It makes sense for us to place our expertise at the disposal of the international community and thus make a valuable contribution towards the peace process."
Foreign Minister Steinmeier arrives in Greece today to continue his series of official visits to European partners.
The aim is to see the situation in the country for himself and signal Germany’s support
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier arrives in Greece today to continue his series of official visits to European partners.
At the start of Greece’s EU Council Presidency, the Foreign Minister will meet a range of high-ranking representatives from the fields of politics, business and civil society for discussions in order to see the situation in the country for himself and to show solidarity with the people in Greece.
The Federal Foreign Office Spokesperson, Martin Schäfer, stated that Foreign Minister Steinmeier considered aims of his trip to be “to see the situation in Greece for himself, be informed about this year’s programme of reforms by the Greek Government and other representatives of the Greek state and society, whilst at the same time expressing the Federal Government’s support for Greece’s EU Council Presidency.”
Steinmeier’s visit was also “a sign of solidarity with the people in Greece (...), who have been through a great deal over the course of the current reform efforts”.
Before his trip, Foreign Minister Steinmeier commented on Greece’s efforts to reform:
“The Greeks deserve great respect for their willingness to reform and the courage needed to do so”.
In an interview with the Greek daily Ta Nea (9 January), the German Foreign Minister also stated:
that is the leitmotif of the new Federal Government in Germany.
With regard to the process of European integration, Steinmeier made it clear that
These go hand in hand.
See the situation for himself
On Thursday evening Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier will first of all meet his Greek counterpart, Evangelos Venizelos, for a discussion.
A discussion with pupils from the German-Greek school is also on the agenda for the visit.
Greece, freedom of movement for workers, South Sudan
Minister of State Roth on first official visit to Warsaw
I look forward to working closely and successfully on European matters with my Polish colleague Piotr Serafin.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier to meet Swedish Minister for Foreign Affairs Bildt
Foreign Minister Steinmeier will meet his Swedish counterpart, Carl Bildt, for talks at the Federal Foreign Office on Wednesday 8 January.
Their discussion will focus on developments in the European Union and relations between the EU and its neighbouring regions, as well as international topics.
Bild: The Danish Foreign Minister Holger Nielsen (left) on a visit to Berlin
In addition to this, the German Foreign Minister will meet members of the Greek Parliament as well as representatives of the business community.
Bild: Foreign Minister Steinmeier (9 January 2014)
Bild: Working breakfast
Today (9 January) Michael Roth, Minister of State at the Federal Foreign Office, left on a trip to Warsaw, his first since taking office.
Among others, he will meet his Polish counterpart Piotr Serafin, Secretary of State for European Affairs.
Minister of State Roth issued the following statement on the subject of his visit:
Alongside France, Poland is our key partner in the EU and when it comes to shaping the process of further European integration.
Together with our two neighbours, we want to work within the Weimar Triangle to play a harmonising role that benefits Europe.
In the course of Greece’s EU Council Presidency we will, above alle, closely coordinate on matters such as the EU’s social dimension, the deepening of the EU as a union of shared values and the way forward for the economic and monetary union.
During his trip Minister of State Roth will also meet the Plenipotentiary of the Prime Minister for International Dialogue, State Secretary Władysław Bartoszewski.
On 9 January, Foreign Minister Steinmeier had a working breakfast with his Danish counterpart, Holger Nielsen, who, just like his host, “is still relatively new to the job”.
However, he would be delighted if Denmark were to cooperate with the future EU banking union as “the more states took part” the more effective it would be.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier visits Athens –
the aim is to see the situation for himself and signal Germany’s support for the reform process.
Respect and support for Greece
On Thursday and Friday, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier continues his series of official visits to European partners in Athens.
At the start of Greece’s EU Council Presidency, the Foreign Minister will meet a range of high-ranking representatives from the fields of politics, business and civil society for discussions, in order to see the situation in the country for himself and to signal German support for Greece’s reform process.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier with his Greek counterpart Venizelos in Athens
Directly after arriving in the the Greek capital, Foreign Minister Steinmeier met his Greek counterpart Evangelos Venizelos.
There was clearly a great deal of public interest in this meeting – numerous journalists had made their way to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in the heart of Athens.
Encouragement for Greece
Following the bilateral discussion, both Ministers met the German and Greek press.
The questions were largely about cooperation within the EU in the context of Greece’s EU Council Presidency and the situation in the southern European country.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier said that he wanted to see the current situation for himself and wanted to use this early visit to "offer encouragement" to this country.
Steinmeier stressed that the EU needed a "competent, self-confident Greek EU Council Presidency" and thus his visit also aimed to be a sign of support.
With regard to the reform process pursued by the Government, Steinmeier stated:
I am also here because Greece has a long path ahead of it (and I) have great respect for how you have weathered the crisis and rely on this Government continuing along this track.
The Government must continue the reform process
Foreign Minister Venizelos expressly thanked the Federal Government and the Germans for the support they had provided Greece to date.
He was pleased, in as far as more positive economic prospects went, that a first primary budget surplus was expected for Greece in 2014, said Venizelos.
In the flight to Athens
This positive development, as well as the economic success seen in the tourism sector in the past year, showed that the process of reform must be continued, the German Foreign Minister emphasised.
In Steinmeier’s view, consideration was also needed on how Germany could contribute to renewed higher investment in Greece.
"Refresh" his insight into Greece
On Friday, further political talks with Prime Minister Antonis Samaras and President Karolos Papoulias will take place.
Before his trip to Athens, Foreign Minister Steinmeier spoke to the Greek daily, TA NEA.
Read the interview, published on 9 January 2014, here.
*** What can Europe and Greece expect from the new grand coalition in Germany?
Why are things different with the SPD this time?
Our message to Europe and to our partners in Greece is:
we believe that you will succeed!
We are standing by you!
We have been through a tough period.
We have embarked on far-reaching reforms in Europe and have great respect for what Greece has undertaken in its own country.
However, we are not yet out of the woods.
In these difficult times, our European partners can count on Germany’s support,
that is the leitmotif of the new Federal Government and indeed it is what the SPD stands for.
Is there any hope that German policy on Europe will change, that more weight will be placed on growth and employment and less on harsh austerity policies?
On the whole, this is certainly what people are expecting from the SPD’s participation in the new Government.
Is Germany considering a fundamental change of policy in the eurozone?
We want a European Union which is politically and economically strong whilst also socially just.
because as much as our European competitiveness is important in light of fierce global competition,
we must not lose sight of the internal cohesion both within our societies and between the countries of Europe.
The feeling of being part of a community of values and of living standards in Europe has been lost to too many people.
Significant efforts have already been made here, we must now reinforce them, we must be more creative.
I am thinking particularly of our commitment to raising employment levels.
Youth unemployment and accompanying lack of hope that this brings to a whole generation could be the greatest danger facing Europe,
and it is vital that we use our European policy to counter it.
Greece has undertaken an exceptional reorganisation of its public accounts, with measures totalling 70 billion euros within a period of three and a half years (which equates to 35 per cent of GDP).
However, the harsh austerity measures have polarised the population and seen the coalition’s majority eroded to three votes.
Does that not worry you?
Greece truly has implemented unprecedented and courageous reforms and austerity measures.
Everyone in Europe acknowledges this and
of course we are also aware of what this means for the people in Greece in their daily lives, and that after so many difficult years, scepticism runs deep.
We must particularly keep in mind those who are vulnerable to suffering most due to the crisis –
young people who deserve the prospect of finding employment, people who have lost their jobs, older people as well as small and medium-sized enterprises in trouble.
Is a discussion about further debt relief not due soon given that Greece is expected to show a primary budget surplus?
What is happening with the discussion on the need for a third programme?
Greece is on track to getting its public finances back on an even keel.
We look at the great progress that Greece has made in just a few years – from a budget deficit of over 10% to the possibility of seeing a primary budget surplus over the past year.
In the upcoming months we will consult our partners in the Eurogroup to see how we can further help Greece to stabilise its public finances on a truly sustainable basis.
Greece’s current rescue programme runs to the end of 2014,
there is no point at this stage in speculating on the further funding requirements for after then.
I welcome the ambition of Prime Minister Samaras and Foreign Minister Venizelos to end the rescue programmes as soon as possible and to make an independent return to the financial markets.
And I see light at the end of the tunnel –
thanks to the Greek Government’s committed reform policy, after many years of bad news there are finally – for the first time since the start of the crisis – many promising signs that Greece will see a return to growth and higher levels of employment.
That was the precise aim of the European rescue packages.
Are you concerned about the high levels of anti-German sentiment in Greece?
How does this compare to the anti-Greek feeling in Germany, particularly in the German press?
Greece has often denounced expressions of extremism within the country.
Do you think that Germany has done enough to condemn its own voices of extremism?
Greece and Germany are close partners, Greeks and Germans good friends.
We are linked by values and beliefs as well as by close social ties.
We should not set too much store by exaggerations in the media, they do not represent the feelings of the majority of people in either country.
Nevertheless the line must be drawn when things become offensive or turn violent.
I am thus grateful for the swift and decisive reaction on the part of Prime Minister Samaras and Foreign Minister Venizelos to the attack on our Ambassador’s residence in Athens.
the perpetrators will not succeed in damaging relations between Germany and Greece or between the Germans and the Greeks.
Why is Germany afraid of taking on a leading role in Europe?
Why are you not doing anything to accelerate the process of integration?
Are you afraid that eurosceptic and populist movements could triumph in the upcoming European Parliament elections?
If so, when the pro-European majority changes will it not already be too late?
Germany is aware of its responsibility for Europe and for the process of European integration.
For us, Europe is not one of many options, it is the result of the lesson learnt from our history and the only future that we have.
This is exactly why I have no intention of concealing the fact that I am concerned about the state that our union is in.
On the one hand because despite all the progress made, the economic crisis is far from behind us.
Yet on the other hand, because the economic crisis could unleash centrifugal political forces which would be dangerous for the European Union as a whole.
In 2014, precisely one hundred years after the outbreak of the First World War, we must once again remind ourselves that the European project is more than one large market, a common currency and the allocation of budgetary funds.
It is about ensuring that we can all live in peace and security, that we have good work and prosperity.
We must continue to make this clear, especially now in the run-up to the European Parliament elections.
We should not eschew arguments with populists, nationalists, those who are sleepwalking, calling themselves “eurosceptics” and voicing crude stereotypes which play to a nationalist agenda without offering their own solutions.
We must actively engage in debate and convince people time and again, not with words but with action, that Europe is the basis for progress and provides grounds for confidence.
Looking back on the onset of the crisis in the eurozone and the mistakes which were made,
what do you think could or should have been done differently?
It would be bad form for the new German Foreign Minister, who has only just taken office, to pass brash judgement on how the crisis was dealt with.
We must always remember that combating the European debt crisis demanded extremely difficult decisions to be taken under highly complex circumstances as well as under great time pressure.
In the dialogue with our partners in Europe, we Germans must more strongly express what comprises the core of Europe to us, and what we ourselves were granted, even in difficult economic times:
understanding and trust.
We enjoyed both at a time when the economic situation in our country was extremely threatening, just over ten years ago now.
Both gave us the support we needed to implement the necessary reforms in Germany.
Do you agree with those who say that Greece should never have been accepted into the eurozone in the first place?
In reality, such questions do not help anyone.
Greece is part of the eurozone, and this will remain the case.
What is important now is for us to do our homework, in order that in the future, we can avoid such serious setbacks as the debt crisis.
On 5 December the Ministers of Education and Cultural Affairs of the Länder and Minister of State Cornelia Pieper signed an administrative agreement on the German Schools Abroad Act.
Historic moment for German schools abroad
Related links
On 10 January Tel Aviv was the first Israeli city to inaugurate a memorial to the homosexual victims of National Socialism.
Memorial to the homosexual victims of National Socialism
On 10 January Tel Aviv was the first Israeli city to inaugurate a memorial to the homosexual victims of National Socialism.
German Ambassador Andreas Michaelis inaugurated the new memorial together with Tel Aviv’s mayor Ron Huldai.
Mayor Huldai emphasised the openness of the city of Tel Aviv.
“The memorial reminds us how important it now is to respect every individual.
Warning for the future
Ambassador Michaelis inaugurates the memorial
In his speech Ambassador Michaelis recalled the atrocities of the Nazi dictatorship:
“In Nazi Germany Jews and other minorities were prevented from participating in public life.
Today we are using this public place to remember these people.”
He said that a free society respected all individuals regardless of their race, religion, gender, origin and sexual orientation.
He added that it was important to commemorate events of the past with memorials and street names,
stating that these should be warnings for the future.
Group of Friends of the Syrian People meets in Paris
The memorial is adjacent to the community centre for homosexuals.
Representatives of the core group of the Group of Friends of the Syrian People met in Paris on 12 January.
Representatives of the core group of the Group of Friends of the Syrian People met in Paris on 12 January.
Arrival in Paris (12 January 2014)
The core group of the Group of Friends of the Syrian People is determined that the planned Montreux peace conference be a success.
"2014 could be a decisive year for the whole region," Foreign Minister Steinmeier stressed on arrival in Paris.
Aims of Geneva II
One major aim of the upcoming conference in Montreux is to bring about a ceasefire in Syria.
Since 2012 Germany has made available just under 240 million euros for humanitarian assistance in Syria.
The Group of Friends of the Syrian People comprises over 100 countries.
Who'll be taking part on 22 January?
Ruins in Aleppo
It is still unclear to what extent the Syrian opposition will be represented at the Geneva II peace conference.
So another aim of the Paris conference is to encourage the Syrian National Coalition opposition alliance to participate in the conference and enter into the political process.
Its shape, a pink triangle, is a reminder of the pink triangle that homosexuals had to wear in concentration camps as a form of identification.
Homosexuals were persecuted in Nazi Germany.
In 1936 a centre was established on Heinrich Himmler’s orders specifically to fight homosexuality.
Several thousand people were sent to concentration camps because of their sexual orientation. As many as 15,000 of these people died there.
The National Coalition will be represented in Paris by its recently reelected President, Ahmed Jarba.
Core group meeting in Paris
"What we want to do here is persuade people," Foreign Minister Steinmeier said in Paris.
Speech by Ambassador Andreas Michaelis at the inauguration of the Monument for the Memory of those persecuted by the Nazi Regime for their sexual preference and gender identity, 10 January 2014 (PDF, 40 KB).
The only way to reach a political solution, he went on, was through direct talks between the Syrian Government and opposition.
It is also unclear whether Iran will be taking part in the conference.
As early as 1935 the National Socialists passed legislation rendering male homosexuality a criminal offence.
"My position is that we should try to involve Syria's neighbours, including Iran," Steinmeier said beforehand.
For further information on the situation in Syria click here
Foreign Minister Steinmeier welcomes implementation agreement with Iran
Following many years and difficult negotiations we have, for the first time, managed to conclude a robust agreement on restricting Iran’s nuclear programme which contains concrete, transparent steps, the details of which are verifiable.
This is a critical step forward which we can now build on.
This demonstrates that it pays to negotiate with perseverance and adopt clear positions.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement today (12 January) on the agreement with Iran regarding the implementation of the E3+3 Joint Plan of Action:
Building on this, we will now swiftly initiate the next vital stage of negotiations with Iran on reaching a final agreement.
First memorial in Israel for homosexuals persecuted under National Socialism
The memorial is intentionally situated in the middle of the centrally located Meir Park.
Now this public place is to be used deliberately to remember the victims of persecution.
It is natural for a memorial like this to be in Tel Aviv, a place which is open to all groups and people.”
To this end the provisions in Section 175 of the Penal Code against homosexual behaviour were broadened considerably.
The main purpose of the meeting was to prepare for the Syria peace conference opening in Switzerland on 22 January.
The main purpose of the meeting was to prepare for the Syria peace conference opening in Montreux (Switzerland) on 22 January.
During the talks with the moderate Syrian opposition, the representatives of the core group wanted to smooth the way for a successful peace conference.
The conference, also referred to as "Geneva II", is due to open on 22 January and is intended as "a further stage in easing the conflict", as Steinmeier said prior to the meeting.
Now that "agreement has been reached on the destruction of Syria's chemical weapons," Steinmeier said, the main priority was to create "humanitarian corridors" so as to be able to help the suffering civilian population in Syria more efficiently.
The conference on Syria is also intended to bring progress on the formation of a transitional government with full executive powers.
Germany takes the view that a sustainable long-term solution can only be achieved with the participation of all major international stakeholders.
The core group includes Germany, the US, France, the UK, Italy, the United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Turkey.
This is still a matter of controversy within the Syrian opposition.
Chairman's conclusions, Group of Friends of the Syrian People – Marrakech (12 December 2012)
the aim was to see the situation for himself and signal Germany’s support for the reform process.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier continued his series of official visits to European partners in Athens on Thursday and Friday.
At the start of Greece’s EU Council Presidency, the Foreign Minister met a range of high-ranking representatives from the fields of politics, business and civil society for discussions, in order to see the situation in the country for himself and to signal German support for Greece’s reform process.
There was clearly a great deal of interest in the German Foreign Minister’s visit –
be it after the discussion with his Greek counterpart Evangelos Venizelos on the evening of his arrival, or over the course of the many talks with representatives of the Government, members of parliament and civil society on his second day, he was constantly accompanied by numerous members of the press who made full use to the opportunity to ask questions.
One the one hand, they were interested in the cooperation within the EU in the context of Greece’s EU Council Presidency.
In light of the first signs of the improvement of the economic situation, a further point of interest was support for Greece’s reform process.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and President of Greece Papoulias
In this regard, Foreign Minister Steinmeier said that he not only wanted to see the current situation for himself and but wanted to use this early visit to “offer encouragement” to the country.
As, according to Steinmeier, the EU needed a “competent, self-confident” Greek EU Council Presidency.
The work of the Presidency was taking place at an important time, in particular due to the European Parliament elections in May.
The German Foreign Minister also made it clear that he saw many large tasks ahead for this Presidency,
an example of which was concluding the Banking Union, thus contributing to achieving more stability within financial policy.
His visit, therefore, also aimed to be a sign of support.
In terms of Greece’s reform process, Steinmeier expressed his recognition for the efforts undertaken thus far and conveyed his “great respect” to the Greek side.
Offering encouragement - here with Prime Minister Samaras
Following his “intense trilateral discussion” with Prime Minister Samaras and his counterpart Venizelos, Foreign Minister Steinmeier underlined that he believed the Government would continue the programme of reforms that it had initiated:
“I am convinced that both have the courage and determination to continue along the path that they have embarked on. ”
In addition to this, Foreign Minister Steinmeier held further political talks with President Karolos Papoulias.
The topic also remained a key discussion topic in meetings with Government and opposition members of the Greek Parliament.
Strengthening business investment
Foreign Minister Steinmeier speaking to members of the business community in Athens
Foreign Minister Venizelos took the opportunity presented by the visit to thank the Federal Government and the Germans for the support they had provided to Greece to date.
He was now pleased about the more positive economic prospects, above all about the primary budget surplus forecast for 2014.
This positive development, as well as the economic success seen in the tourism sector in the past year, showed that the process of reform must be continued, the German Foreign Minister also reiterated.
“These are matters which I would like to continue working on”, said Steinmeier.
Steinmeier also left discussions with German and Greek business representatives with the impression that there were signs of a slight improvement.
Nonetheless unemployment, especially amongst young people, continued to pose a significant challenge.
Discussion on the prospects of young Greeks
Steinmeier with pupils from the Ellinogermaniki school in Athens
To conclude his visit, Foreign Minister Steinmeier visited the “Ellinogermaniki Agogi” school in Athens.
In the fully-packed classroom, Foreign Minister Steinmeier held a comprehensive discussion with German and Greek pupils on the future challenges faced by the country, German support for the Greek reform process from the perspective of the young as well as the prospects that young people have for the future.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier then not only expressed his warm thanks to the those taking part in the discussion, on the podium and in the room.
Rather, with regard to the pupils’ desire for “a good future”, he expressed the hope that “Europe will be in a different and better condition” in a few years.
The “Ellinogermaniki Agogi” school offers German lessons to its nearly 2000 pupils right from kindergarten.
The pupils are thus prepared for the exams of the German Language Certificate of the Standing Conference of the Ministers of Education and Cultural Affairs (KMK).
Since 2010, the school has belonged to the network of the PASCH partner school initiative, which is coordinated by the Federal Foreign Office.
Click here for the photo gallery of the visit
Speaking in Jerusalem on Monday, Steinmeier described Sharon as “a tireless fighter for his homeland Israel.
German-Croatian Forum at the Federal Foreign Office:
Federal Foreign Minister Steinmeier on his first visit to the Middle East since resuming office
Foreign Minister Steinmeier meets Foreign Minister Pusić
He represented the Federal Government at the funeral of Ariel Sharon.
It was Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s first visit to Israel and the Palestinian territories since his return to office.
On Monday Steinmeier described Sharon as “a tireless fighter for his homeland Israel.
The German-Croatian Forum is also being held at the Federal Foreign Office today.
Steinmeier stressed that there were “no guarantees” in the region.
With this goal in mind, during his visit to the Middle East Steinmeier held talks with politicians from both sides, in which he supported the United States’ mediation efforts.
For more information on the German-Croatian Forum, please visit
Following his arrival late on Sunday evening, Foreign Minister Steinmeier first participated in the official funeral ceremony at the Knesset on Monday and then attended the burial service at the farm of the Sharon family in the Negev.
www.auswaertiges-amt.de/EN/Aussenpolitik/Laender/Aktuelle_Artikel/Kroatien/140109_D-Kro-Froum.html
The numerous international guests included US Vice President Joe Biden and Quartet Representative to the Middle East Tony Blair.
Steinmeier and Abbas during their talks
On Monday afternoon Steinmeier then travelled to Ramallah in the Palestinian territories,
where he met the President of the Palestinian Authority, Mahmoud Abbas.
Steinmeier said that Germany did not underestimate how much was being asked of the participants in the peace talks, but added,
“Only when each side is willing to give way and seek a compromise will it be possible for the negotiations to be concluded successfully.”
The settlements issue
The settlements were an important issue for the Palestinian side.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier expects the settlements also to be a focus of discussion at the next EU Foreign Ministers meeting on 20 January.
The UN Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons of 10 October 1980 (CCW) entered into force on 2 December 1983. Its purpose, as reflected in its full title, is to prohibit or restrict the use of certain conventional weapons which may be deemed to be excessively injurious or to have indiscriminate effects, both in declared wars and in other armed conflicts.
Dinner at the Israeli Foreign Ministry
Steinmeier concluded his visit to the Middle East with a dinner with Israeli Foreign Minister Avigdor Liberman before departing late on Monday evening.
At the Israeli Foreign Ministry Steinmeier reiterated his hope that both sides would “negotiate seriously” and also see the advantages of an agreement.
Meetings of the States parties to the CCW chapeau Convention are held once a year in Geneva, as are annual Conferences of High Contracting Parties to Amended Protocol II and to Protocol V, as well as Meetings of Experts on these two Protocols.
He added that a solution for peace would benefit the people on both sides.
Protocol V to the UN Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons is based on the fact that explosive remnants of war, such as unexploded and abandoned ordnance, present a serious danger to the civilian population and frequently impede reconstruction following armed conflict.
On Tuesday 14 January, Foreign Minister Steinmeier will meet Vesna Pusić, his Croatian counterpart, for talks at the Federal Foreign Office.
Besides discussing bilateral relations, Steinmeier and Pusić will focus during their meeting on the regional development of the Western Balkans, especially regarding the EU enlargement process, their visions for the EU’s future, as well as international issues.
The Forum brings together representatives from the political and diplomatic spheres, as well as from civil society, to exchange views on deepening the relations between Germany and Croatia and on ways to jointly strengthen the European Union.
Foreign Minister Pusić and the Minister of State at the Federal Foreign Office, Michael Roth, will conclude the event with some closing remarks.
Speaking in Ramallah, the Federal Foreign Minister emphasised that he had already issued a public statement from Germany following the first announcement of new building in the settlements, describing it as destructive for Secretary of State Kerry’s efforts,
and had therefore urged that there be no further announcements.
Protocol V is thus an important addition to the CCW chapeau Convention.
The annual discussions between military experts and government representatives focus on the problems associated with terrorist attacks involving the use of improvised explosive devices (IED), which are a danger to soldiers and civilians alike, and on exchanging information with a view to improving countermeasures.
an undertaking to destroy existing stocks within four years of the entry into force of the Convention for the given country (as an exception, a small number of anti-personnel mines may be kept for the purpose of training mine clearance staff and for research into improving detection and destruction techniques);
an undertaking to clear emplaced anti-personnel mines within ten years of the entry into force of the Convention for the given country; this deadline can be extended by a decision taken by the States Parties at the annual Meeting of the States Parties;
an undertaking to cooperate internationally on mine clearance (including technical support for affected States Parties), to provide civilians with information on the dangers posed by mines and to provide assistance for mine victims, in so far as possible;
The implementation of the Ottawa Convention is going according to plan.
Trade in anti-personnel mines has practically ceased; the number of producing countries has fallen dramatically.
Only one State Party is known to have used anti-personnel mines in 2011.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier travelled to Israel and the Palestinian territories from 12 to 13 January.
Attendance at the funeral of former Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, who died on Saturday, was the focal point of Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s visit to Israel and the Palestinian territories on 12 and 13 January.
Eight States Parties still have to destroy their stocks.
In order to implement the Ottawa Convention in Germany, a national Act implementing the Convention was passed, entering into force on 10 July 1998. Among other things this Act criminalises the production, use and stockpiling of, as well as trade in, anti-personnel mines, and thus complements the War Weapons Control Act.
The Convention states that Meetings of States Parties are to be held annually, while a Review Conference is to be organised at five-year intervals.
An Action Plan is to be adopted to ensure that the remaining challenges can be tackled and to guarantee that deadlines for the destruction of APM stockpiles and for mine clearance can be complied with.
The EU – the world’s largest donor towards humanitarian landmine clearance
The goal of Germany and the EU countries is to ensure that the Ottawa Convention is applied globally and implemented rigorously.
As part of its commitment to a global ban on anti-personnel mines, the German Government supports mine and ordnance clearance, especially in locations where mines and unexploded ordnance constitute an urgent humanitarian problem.
In the international context the EU (the Commission and the member states combined) is by far the largest donor towards humanitarian mine clearance; between 2006 and 2010 it provided roughly a billion euros.
Randbox:
Two other States Parties are suspected of having used anti-personnel mines in the past years.
Progress will be evaluated and the remaining challenges identified at the Third Review Conference to be held in Maputo from 23 to 27 June 2014.
Ottawa Convention of 18 September 1997 PDF | 1 MB
Act implementing the Ottawa Convention, 6 July 1998 PDF | 226 KB
States Parties to the Ottawa Convention PDF | 30 KB
Resolution 68/72 of the UN General Assembly on Assistance in Mine Action, 11 December 2013 PDF | 51 KB
UN Strategy on Mine Action 2013-2018 PDF | 776 KB
UN Gender Guidelines for Mine Action Programmes 2013-2018 PDF | 3 MB
German-Norwegian partnership
The talks focused on the intensification of the energy relations between Germany and Norway as well as on current international issues.
Video Script
On 9 and 10 January, Foreign Minister Steinmeier travelled to Greece for his first official visit.
He wanted to see the situation for himself and also show support for the Greek EU Council Presidency as well as respect for the ongoing reform process.
We are seeing the first signs that the worst of Greece’s severe crisis is now behind it.
Six months which hold many challenges.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier was visiting on 9 and 10 January –
it was important to him to come early on in his term in office in order to see the situation in Greece for himself.
After his first meeting with his counterpart, Foreign Minister Venizelos, Steinmeier makes it clear that he is happy to be here.
We need a competent, self-confident Presidency, which enjoys the support of all the member states within the European Union.
(...) and I am also here to say that we Germans have great respect for the first leg of the journey which Greece has embarked on.
Steinmeier addresses the issue of how the economic situation could be improved on many occasions.
Promoting investment is a topic of great importance to Steinmeier.
The high level of interest in the German Foreign Minister’s visit is also evident at an event in a school in Athens.
The pupils, who focus on German, came out in great numbers to attend a discussion with Steinmeier.
I truly hope that you do not only enjoy a successful career but that if we meet again in five or six years, Europe will be in a different and better condition than the one we have discussed today.
With this in mind, all the best for the future and thank you very much.
During this first visit to Greece, Foreign Minister Steinmeier wanted to see the situation for himself, as well as to convey support and respect to his Greek partners.
At the same time he encouraged all the partners who he spoke to to continue along the path of reform, even if the journey remains long.
On 14 January, Foreign Minister Steinmeier met his Norwegian colleague, Børge Brende, in Berlin for political talks.
The UN Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons
At present, some 84 countries are States parties to Protocol V.
Amended Protocol II to the CCW on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Mines, Booby-Traps and Other Devices has retained its significance following the entry into force of the Ottawa Convention.
This topic was put on the Amended Protocol II agenda once again in 2013 at the German Government’s initiative.
The German armed forces have , since 2010, met a key requirement in this respect: since that date, the only anti-vehicle mines supplied to the German military for use have been detectable ones with a limited active life.
However, although the issue was discussed in depth, the Annual Conference of the High Contracting Parties in November 2013 failed to extend the mandate for talks at expert level due to opposition from Belarus.
A sign of solidarity
The Acropolis sits atop Athens as if to defy all crises.
In the European Union, the country has recently taken over the Council Presidency for the first half of the year.
My early visit here is intended to be a sign of support.
To this end, he also meets with German and Greek members of the business community.
In impeccable German they ask the Foreign Minister many questions about their future in Europe.
working for Europe’s future On the occasion of the German-Croatian Forum, Foreign Minister Steinmeier and his Croatian counterpart Pusić met in Berlin.
On the occasion of the German-Croatian Forum, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier and his Croatian counterpart Vesna Pusić met in Berlin.
Alongside bilateral relations, the focus lay above all on Europe’s future.
A further topic was the situation in the Western Balkans.
Working for Europe’s future together
It was the first discussion between the German Foreign Minister and his Croatian counterpart Pusić since Steinmeier returned to office.
“We have agreed that we want to continue working for Europe’s future.”
Foreign Minister Pusić stated that she hoped that the event would be the first of many.
German-Croatian Forum
Germany and Croatia –
in discussion with one another
A few months after Croatia joined the EU, the Forum aims to address how to contribute to intensifying cooperation within Europe.
The discussion focused on the contribution of both countries to the further development of Europe.
Members of the panel took the view that a particularly important task of political leaders was fighting unemployment, especially among young people in southern Europe.
Roth advocated tackling social problems in Europe in order to counter populist trends.
Croatia –
Panel discussion – participants (from left to right):
Moderated by Andrea Despot.
The discussion participants also looked at how to help project a positive image of Europe, both internally and externally.
that the EU benefits everyone had to be conveyed more strongly.
Croatia was proof of the fact that opting for the path of Europe was worth it.
Minister of State Roth also emphasised the important role that Croatia played with regard to the European prospects of the Western Balkans.
The example it set showed that Croatia “lies not in the middle, but at the heart of Europe”.
German-Croatian relations
Programme of the German-Croatian Forum, 14 January 2014, Berlin (last updated on 6 January) (PDF, 94 KB)
They chiefly dealt with the topic of regional development in the Western Balkans, alongside the enhancement of bilateral relations.
They also focused on the process of enlargement and the future development of the European Union.
After the talks, Foreign Minister Steinmeier commented:
Both expressed their appreciation for the German-Croatian Forum, taking place concurrently;
it served to highlight opportunities to further develop bilateral relations on a regular basis.
In addition to this, Steinmeier and Pusić discussed international issues such as the conflict in Syria and the situation in North Africa, as well as the significance of 2014 as a year of commemoration.
At the same time, the first German-Croatian Forum took place in the Federal Foreign Office.
Civil society representatives and politicians from both countries held discussions with Minister of State Michael Roth and his Croatian counterpart Hrvoje Marušić, among others.
The German MP, Josip Juratović, and Member of the Croatian Parliament, Jozo Radoš were also on the panel.
Minister of State Roth underscored that Germany could help other countries to modernise their education systems and to increase their competitiveness by contributing the positive experience it had with its system of dual training.
at the heart of Europe
The Croatian Deputy Minister Marušić expressed his desire for a more honest treatment of Europe;
The aim of the trip on 12 January was clear:
In geographical terms, Foreign Minister Steinmeier was heading to Paris.
stressed Foreign Minister Steinmeier and he underlined that he and the other members of the core group of the Friends of the Syrian People would have to work to persuade the opposition.
There was a long discussion behind closed doors at the French Foreign Ministry on Sunday.
This is equally important to the president of the Syrian opposition, Ahmed Jarba, as is the formation of a transitional government and the release of imprisoned members of the opposition.
Jarba stated that the regime of Assad and his family will have no place in Syria in future.
The outcome of the meeting?
Steinmeier said that Ahmed Jarba was open in principle to the idea.
A good sign.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier: Germany to increase humanitarian assistance for the victims of the Syria conflict by 80 million euros.
The suffering endured by people in Syria worsens every day.
Millions of people in the region depend on the support of the international community.
We want, and indeed must, work together to alleviate the suffering of the many people who have lost everything as a result of the civil war and have fled war and violence.
The additional funding will mainly be used to continue and expand humanitarian projects run by German NGOs.
Furthermore, Germany is supporting measures launched by the United Nations and other international organisations.
Since 2012, Germany has made available a total of around 440 million euros for people in need in Syria and neighbouring countries.
The German Government is thus one of the largest bilateral donors in the Syria crisis.
Around 6.5 million people in Syria have been displaced internally and more than 2.3 million have sought refuge in neighbouring countries, in particular Lebanon, Jordan, Turkey and Iraq.
In political terms, this visit was about bringing peace in Syria one step closer – thus finally:
“... ending the bloodshed in Syria.
People in Syria have endured so much suffering,”
Representatives from Europe, the US and Arab states attended.
They are working together to ensure the success of the major peace conference due to take place in Montreux, Switzerland on 22 January.
The 11 Foreign Ministers from the core group are trying to convince the opposition alliance that it’s necessary to enter into direct talks – direct talks with President Assad’s regime.
Access to humanitarian assistance, which is so vital, is especially important to the Ministers in the core group, who were the guests of Laurent Fabius.
Perhaps a small step has been taken towards peace.
In a few days’ time, the opposition will decide whether to attend the talks in Montreux.
“Therefore, I hope that we put forward convincing arguments and that those in the coalition – in the opposition coalition – in Syria who have doubts will decide to go to Montreux ...”
“I believe, at any rate, that we have a duty to the victims, the injured and those who had to leave their homeland Syria to seize the chance in Montreux, no matter how small, to actually bring about the beginning of the end of the hostilities...”
However, a lasting peace settlement in Syria – and everyone present in Paris realised this – is still a long way off.
The second International Pledging Conference for Syria is taking place in Kuwait today at the invitation of UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.
The UN appeal for Syria is calling for around 2.27 billion US dollars for 2014 to meet the humanitarian need inside the country. Around 4.2 billion US dollars will be required for neighbouring countries.
Worldwide ban on cluster munitions
Cluster munitions
© German Press Agency / picture-alliance
The Convention on Cluster Munitions, also known as the Oslo Convention, entered into force on 1 August 2010.
The Convention shows that progress on disarmament is feasible.
Countries which have not become parties to the Convention include the US, Russia, China, Pakistan, India, Israel and Brazil.
The German Government is working to see the Convention applied universally.
Germany, the eleventh country to complete the ratification process, deposited its instrument of ratification on 8 July 2009.
Germany has been a strong supporter of a comprehensive ban on cluster munitions for years.
The Bundeswehr began destroying its cluster munitions as early as 2001; this process will be concluded in 2015, three years before the deadline set in the Convention.
Dismantling cluster munitions
Deadly cluster munitions
This puts particularly the civilian population at risk – not only when the munitions are deployed but also long after hostilities have ended.
It is a significant treaty in the field of humanitarian arms control, prohibiting the use, production, stockpiling and transfer of such weaponry.
The Convention prohibits the use, development, production, stockpiling, import and export of cluster munitions.
Each State Party must destroy all stockpiles covered by the prohibition within eight years of the Convention entering into force.
In exceptional circumstances, this deadline may be extended by up to eight years.
The Convention also aims to increase assistance to victims of cluster munitions detonations and supports the clearance of explosive cluster munition remnants in the affected countries.
Meetings of States Parties to the Oslo Convention are held annually, most recently in Lusaka in September 2013.
They serve to assess the extent to which the obligations in the Convention have been implemented.
A clearance team at work
Germany’s commitment around the world
Germany is actively engaged internationally in the sphere of humanitarian mine and ordnance clearance.
Having become one of the world’s largest and most reliable donors, it has lived up to its prominent role in the implementation and universalisation of the Oslo Convention.
Since 1992, the German Government has provided around 239.4 million euros for projects in this field across the world.
These projects are funded in places where explosive remnants of war pose a particular humanitarian threat.
In total, the Federal Foreign Office provided 15.9 million euros for 42 projects in 22 countries in 2013.
Convention on Cluster Munitions PDF | 140 KB
Homepage of the Convention on Cluster Munitions
I am pleased about his announcement.
Courageous announcement by the French President
The French President made a courageous statement yesterday.
Sebastian Kurz and Frank-Walter Steinmeier
Even people who speak the same language have to talk to each other regularly:
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier thus met his Austrian counterpart Sebastian Kurz in Berlin for political talks on 15 January.
The agenda covered bilateral relations, Europe and the Western Balkans, as well as Syria.
Regular talks agreed
Frequent talks agreed:
Kurz and Steinmeier
Even people who speak the same language have to talk to each other regularly:
Still relatively young, the Convention currently has application in 84 States Parties.
Cluster munitions are especially dangerous because of the large surface areas they affect and the high rate of unexploded ordnance.
The German Foreign Minister stressed that important decisions had also been coordinated in the past, for:
Europe and its immediate neighbourhood, as well as the Middle East, Iran and Syria were all issues discussed by the two Foreign Ministers.
While Steinmeier expressed cautious optimism with regard to the negotiations with Iran and in the Middle East, he noted that much remained to be done in preparation for the Syria peace conference.
The two Foreign Ministers both stated that they were looking forward to the close cooperation between Germany and Austria on all these topics.
Today (15 January) at the Federal Foreign Office in Berlin, Foreign Minister Steinmeier commented on yesterday’s press conference held by the French President as follows:
In view of the interests of Europe as a whole and the hope that we will regain stability, reorientation of France’s economic policy can only be understood as a good message.
All of us have an interest in France’s economic clout being strengthened and the country developing into an engine of Europe’s economy.
Steinmeier meets with his Austrian counterpart On 15 January, Foreign Minister Steinmeier met his Austrian counterpart Sebastian Kurz in Berlin for political talks.
With these words, Foreign Minister Steinmeier welcomed his Austrian counterpart Kurz to the Federal Foreign Office.
And, with a smile, he quoted the Austrian writer Karl Kraus:
“The only thing that divides us is our common mother tongue.”
Steinmeier and Kurz thus agreed to talk to each other “as often as possible”.
“We both assumed office at the same time, and I’m delighted that we’ve been able to come together so soon in Berlin.”
The Austrian Foreign Minister likewise extolled his country’s close relations with its German neighbours.
Old acquaintances:
Minister of State Böhmer and Foreign Minister Kurz
Before his meeting with Steinmeier, Foreign Minister Kurz had an appointment with Minister of State Maria Böhmer.
They already knew each other from their previous posts as Government Commissioners for Integration.
Kurz and Böhmer agreed to explore ways of enhancing cooperation to promote the German language abroad.
Planning a trip to Germany and looking to inform yourself before you go?
The dual system of vocational training, which is well established in both Germany and Austria, is the object of growing interest around the world.
The two politicians specifically agreed that German and Austrian experts and politicians should exchange experience on this issue in order to put this export success to even better use for the two countries.
Discover Destination Germany through the multimedia prism of www.germany.travel.
Langtext:
Foreign Minister Kurz and Minister of State Böhmer also talked about the preparations for the year of remembrance 2014.
German-Austrian relations Last updated on 15 January 2014
It runs 30 offices abroad for that purpose.
Information anyone can access is provided most particularly through the website “Welcome to Destination Germany”, outlining topics and services for every possible type of travel, from honeymoons to business trips and from medical travel to creative visits.
“Our two countries are bound not by a partnership like we have with other countries, but by a genuine friendship.”
However, they did not only talk about bilateral relations.
The dual system of vocational training – an export success
They affirmed that the idea of Europe must play a prominent role in the events planned to mark the centenary of the start of World War I.
In 2014, the GNTB’s marketing focus is on UNESCO World Heritage – Sustainable Culture and Nature Tourism.
Optimised for use on smartphones and tablets, the website also provides direct access to the community-driven travel guide Everplaces and to the Welterbe app developed on the basis of that platform. The app is compatible with iOS and android devices.
Discover all of this, and much more about Destination Germany, at
Germany and Tunisia have agreed to cooperate closely in order to jointly advance democratic transformation in the country following the collapse of the Ben Ali regime.
Following a political crisis triggered off by two political assassinations, the country is about to adopt a new constitution.
The transition to pluralistic democracy and stable rule of law must be accompanied by an ongoing improvement in the social and economic conditions under which the Tunisian people live.
Germany has provided more than 51 million euros and supported more than one hundred projects with a view to fostering democratic change in the country.
Bild: Soldier with a flower in his gun barrel
These consultations at state secretary level demonstrate the new quality of bilateral relations and the importance the German Government places on Tunisia’s political and economic transformation.
Transformation partnership with Tunisia
Ambassador Volkmar Wenzel was appointed the Minister’s personal representative for the Arab world in August 2011.
The Federal Foreign Office also established a work unit to coordinate the German Government’s efforts to support North Africa and identify suitable measures.
Moreover, the German Government agreed to convert Tunisian debts, releasing up to 60 million euros for jointly agreed projects and reforms.
Click here to access the website Allemagnepartenaire.tn (French)
Click here for more information in German on the promotion of transformation partnership projects
Bild: A polling station in Tunisia
On 14 January 2014, the Tunisian people celebrated the third anniversary of the largely peaceful changes which swept through their country.
Democratisation, the economy and cooperation in higher education
You can find some examples of projects within the framework of the transformation partnership here
The Partnership for Democracy and Shared Prosperity with the Southern Mediterranean, which was approved by the European Council in spring 2011, is one of the components of the EU’s revised Neighbourhood Policy.
The intention is to better target and coordinate support from the EU in the future.
Support is also to be more closely linked to democratic reforms.
Tunisia has been associated with the EU since 1995.
The European Union intends to provide a total of more than one billion euros in additional funding for the Neighbourhood Policy.
The European Investment Bank raised its commitments to economic development in the region by one billion euros and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development has expanded its mandate to include the Southern Mediterranean region.
Bild: Catherine Ashton and Tunisian Human Rights League Chairman Mokhtar Trifi (February 2011)
The EU also contributed its own election observation mission to the Constituent Assembly elections in Tunisia on 23 October 2011.
Bernardino León was appointed EU Special Representative for the Southern Mediterranean in summer 2011.
Germany – always worth a visit!
The German National Tourist Board uses its website to provide extensive and well-presented information about towns and cities, culture, events, leisure activities and business trips.
Based in Frankfurt am Main, the German National Tourist Board (GNTB) has been showcasing Destination Germany on the global market for 60 years, through a broad range of events and campaigns.
These have included international tourism fairs, workshops and PR events.
The GNTB internationally promotes Germany as a travel destination on behalf of the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy.
Go to the UNESCO microsite below for image galleries of all the UNESCO World Heritage sites in Germany, plus an interactive map, 360° panoramas, videos, an instagram feed and a range of market-specific campaigns.
The EU agreed on 14 December 2011 to start trade negotiations for a deep and comprehensive free trade area with Tunisia, Egypt, Morocco and Jordan.
The aim is to remove trade barriers and foster economic growth.
The agreement is also to include protection of investments as well as public awarding of contracts.
Parallel to this, the EU has started a dialogue with Tunisia about migration, mobility and security, which includes the goal of concluding a mobility partnership in 2012.
This partnership is to provide a framework for concrete cooperation projects in the areas of legal and illegal migration, development prospects for migration and refugee protection.
G8 support
At their Deauville summit in May 2011 and at further follow-up meetings, the G8 countries agreed to have international financial institutions including the World Bank, the IMF and the European Investment Bank make extensive financial support (around 38 billion dollars) available for the Arab Spring.
The Deauville Partnership was continued in 2013 under the British G8 Presidency with similar priorities to that of the US Presidency (promotion of the private sector, efforts to strengthen the role of women).
More on the German-Tunisian intergovernmental consultations
EU-level support
The basis for assessment is the Action Plan adopted on 19 November 2012 at the EU-Tunisia Association Council.
Funds to the tune of around 400 million euros have been earmarked for Tunisia alone in 2011-2013.
Federal Foreign Office supports platform for Tunisian journalists Last updated on 16 January 2014
The status of East Jerusalem is again being negotiated in the Middle East peace talks.
It's no coincidence that his first official visit outside Europe has brought him here:
The trip by Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier to Israel and the Palestinian territories had already been planned before the death of Ariel Sharon.
But this is not his only mission in the Middle East:
Time for an intensive exchange of views on the state of the peace negotiations – and to explore ways of taking the process forward.
Bundestag debates Bundeswehr deployment in Turkey and the Mediterranean
The German Government wants the Bundeswehr to be involved in the NATO operations in Turkey and the Mediterranean.
A Bundeswehr Patriot missile launcher (file photo)
In his statement to the German Bundestag, Foreign Minister Steinmeier made it plain that the operation is also a manifestation of our responsibility towards our NATO partner Turkey.
The country is directly affected by the situation in Syria:
Children in Haiti playing
Here in Jerusalem, the Israeli press is already waiting.
Steinmeier's counterpart Avigdor Liberman has invited him to dinner.
A frank exchange is part and parcel of the friendship between Germany and Israel.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier stressed that the stationing of the Patriot defence system was a purely defensive act and that the underlying conditions had not changed.
Foreign nationals other than European Union (EU), European Economic Area (EEA) and Swiss nationals may reside in Germany for the purpose of taking up gainful employment if they have a residence permit which explicitly authorises them to do so.
Australian, Israeli, Japanese, Canadian, South Korean, New Zealand and US citizens may obtain such a residence permit from the relevant foreigners authority, including once they have arrived in Germany.
All other foreign nationals on the other hand, must apply for a work visa from their local German mission before coming to Germany.
Foreigners’ access to the labour market is limited by the Ordinance on the admission of foreigners for the purpose of taking up employment.
Access is in principle limited to certain occupational groups and normally requires the approval of the employment authorities, nonetheless there are numerous exceptions to this principle.
In fact in recent years, various legislative measures have further liberalised access to the German labour market.
For unskilled and low-skilled workers access to the labour market remains limited.
In contrast, in the case of highly-qualified foreign nationals such as university graduates, the legal barriers to working in Germany have been further reduced.
Since 1 August 2012, foreign nationals with a recognised university degree have had easier access to the labour market under the EU Blue Card system.
To obtain the Blue Card, they must simply furnish proof of their qualifications and a concrete job offer that would provide annual gross earnings of at least 47,600 euros (2014).
The approval of the Federal Employment Agency is not required.
In the case of highly qualified foreign nationals with a background in mathematics, IT, the natural sciences or technology as well as medical doctors, the EU Blue Card conditions still apply, provided they are offered the same salaries as comparable German employees and their annual gross earnings would be at least 37,128 euros (2014).
In these cases the approval of the Federal Employment Agency is required.
Simplified rules on access to the labour market also apply to academics, highly qualified professionals, executives, senior employees, specialists and similar groups.
In the case of foreign nationals with vocational qualifications, such as care specialists, there are now improved options for gaining recognition for qualifications obtained abroad.
In addition to this, for professions experiencing shortages, access to the German labour market has been made possible without a prior labour market test, as long as the worker’s qualification is recognised as equivalent to a German qualification under the Assessment and Recognition of Foreign Professional Qualifications Act.
Further information on gaining recognition for vocational qualifications obtained abroad is available at Externer Link, öffnet in neuem Fensterwww.anerkennung-in-deutschland.de.
General information on recruitment regulations for foreign nationals is available on the websites of the Federal Ministry of the Interior (BMI) and the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs (BMAS).
More information on recruitment regulations in Germany is also available on the Federal Employment Agency website, Externer Link, öffnet in neuem Fensterwww.arbeitsagentur.de.
Here you will find a Migration Check programme which you can use to obtain quick information on labour market access.
Since 1 January 2014 nationals of Romania and Bulgaria have also enjoyed full freedom of movement for workers.
Currently, therefore, it is only nationals of the EU member state Croatia who require a work permit in Germany.
They should apply for such “EU work permits” at their local German employment agency.
Since 1 August 2012, foreign graduates with a German or other recognised university degree or a foreign degree comparable to a German degree will be eligible to enter Germany to seek employment.
Holders of a jobseeker’s visa may stay in Germany for up to six months to seek employment whilst in the country.
To obtain a jobseeker’s visa, applicants must simply furnish proof of their university degree and that they can support themselves for the duration of their planned stay.
Third country nationals may also be granted residence permits for in-company training in Germany.
This requires the approval of the Federal Employment Agency, however. Before granting approval, the Federal Employment Agency checks whether the training place has been advertised nationwide, including, if applicable, to German nationals or privileged foreign nationals (such as EU applicants).
Graduates of German schools abroad who wish to complete a qualified in-company training course for a state-recognised or similarly accredited training occupation in Germany may be granted a residence permit without the approval of the Federal Employment Agency.
Studying in Germany
Germany is one of the world’s most popular destinations for students.
More information on requirements, framework conditions and opportunities to study in Germany is available on the website: Externer Link, öffnet in neuem Fensterhttp://www.hochschulkompass.de.
For further information on the topic “studying and working in Germany”, please contact the information centre of the International Placement Services (ZAV) at the Federal Employment Agency (zav@arbeitsagentur.de).
Further information is also available from the Federal Foreign Office help desk.
Following the expiry of the transitional arrangements pending the entry into force of full freedom of movement for workers within the EU, as of 1 May 2011 nationals of the following EU member states have enjoyed full freedom of movement for workers: Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia, the Czech Republic and Hungary.
Among other things, he took part in the state funeral for former Prime Minister Sharon.
The square by the Wailing Wall draws many locals and tourists.
On 14 January Costa Rica became the tenth country to ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a Communications Procedure.
Germany was one of the first countries to sign the Optional Protocol.
Israeli flags fly at this religious site ... and fences and security checks are an integral part of the scene.
Who can a German boy turn to if his rights have been violated but he has exhausted or cannot resort to the legal system in Germany?
OAE was launched in 2001 as a direct consequence of the attacks of 11 September, in order to combat terrorist threats in the Mediterranean area.
German children will benefit from the Optional Protocol too
On 13 January, Foreign Minister Steinmeier represents the German Government at the state funeral.
There are no guarantees in this region of the world; but perhaps the chances are better this year than they were previously.”
After Ariel Sharon's funeral, he travels to the Palestinian territories, to Ramallah.
There he is received in the Mukataa, President Mahmoud Abbas' official residence.
He also told the Bundestag that the Operation has morphed into a reconnaissance and observation mission,
One journalist asks the German Minister about his views on Israeli settlement construction:
O-TON: “I myself issued a public statement from Germany following the last announcement on settlement construction and said it was destructive for Secretary of State Kerry's current efforts.”
Steinmeier stresses in Ramallah that neither of the two sides would be able to push through 100 per cent of their demands – and then he has to get on his way again.
Children’s rights in the United Nations
There, just as on the outward journey, the vehicles have to be switched.
The whole delegation has to change vehicles.
Steinmeier therefore emphasises once more the need for both sides to be willing to compromise.
A useful mission, even now
However, Steinmeier continued, it also revealed a considerable disparity between the original mandate and what the operation is really doing today.
Studying and working
Access to the German labour market
It is important to note, however, that they may not commence their intended employment until they have the permit.
Click here for more information.
While seeking employment, jobseekers are not permitted to work, whether on a self-employed basis or otherwise.
Training in Germany
General information such as on recognition of qualifications, employability in Germany or questions relating to social security legislation is available on the websites of the ZAV Externer Link, öffnet in neuem Fensterwww.zav.de/arbeiten-in-deutschland, of the Federal Office for Migration and Refugees as well as on the EURES (European Employment Services) portal Externer Link, öffnet in neuem Fensterhttp://ec.europa.eu/eures.
The Cabinet had agreed at its first meeting on 8 January that Germany should participate in both NATO operations.
The Cabinet had agreed at its first meeting on 8 January that Germany should participate in both operations.
The aim is to prolong the deployment of German Patriot systems as part of the NATO operation.
Steinmeier asked the Bundestag to approve the extension, not least with a view to finding a political resolution to the Syrian conflict.
In his view, this made OAE a useful mission, even now.
This still requires parliamentary approval from the Bundestag.
For more on extending the mandates see the Government website.
More information on Bundeswehr missions can be found at bundeswehr.de
Video: Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s first official visit to the Middle East since resuming office
Teaser: Foreign Minister Steinmeier was in Israel and the Palestinian territories on 12 and 13 January.
East Jerusalem, the famous view of the Old City.
O-TON: “This demonstrates our commitment to Israel and it also bears testimony to the close relations between Germany and Israel.
Today I will also attend Ariel Sharon's funeral.
He was a tireless fighter for his homeland Israel.
His fight is now finished. Today we will carry him to his grave together.”
O-TON: “Naturally, I'm also here to conduct talks on the state of the Middle East peace talks.
So the German Foreign Minister starts the day determined to support the US' tireless shuttle diplomacy in his own talks – with politicians from both sides.
Afterwards, Steinmeier gives a press conference together with the Palestinian chief negotiator, Saeb Erekat.
First of all, he is driven to the Beitunia checkpoint.
The convoy heads for the last stop of the day, the Israeli Foreign Ministry.
Germany will continue to actively support the Middle East peace process in intensive talks during the coming months.
This means that it can at last enter into force.
Children will now have the right to file a complaint about human rights violations directly with the United Nations.
The Optional Protocol strengthens children’s rights
What can a girl in Costa Rica do if she is abused but gets no hearing in the national courts?
As of April 2014 these children will be able to turn to the Committee on the Rights of the Child.
Germany was a main sponsor of the resolution
The so‑called individual application is an important instrument that will give greater weight to children’s rights.
Similar possibilities for filing complaints already exist for many UN Conventions, for example the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women.
The initiative towards an individual complaint procedure in relation to children’s rights was launched some years ago.
Frank-Walter Steinmeier tabled the motions on NATO’s Operations Active Fence and Active Endeavour (OAE) on 16 January.
However, this requires parliamentary approval from the Bundestag.
Speaking in the German Bundestag, Foreign Minister Steinmeier called for the extension of the Bundeswehr mission under the NATO mandate for Operation Active Fence in Turkey.
The mandate allows for up to 400 soldiers to participate in the mission.
It was back in late 2012 that Turkey asked its NATO allies to help it by stationing Patriot air defence units on its territory.
This step was taken in response to the continuing tensions on its border with Syria.
The Syrian conflict also poses a military threat to Turkey.
“Large majority in favour of deploying Patriot defence systems”, 14 December 2012
The operation in the Mediterranean:
In another statement, Foreign Minister Steinmeier tabled the Government’s motion for Bundeswehr participation in NATO’s Operation Active Endeavour (OAE) in the Mediterranean.
This second Bundeswehr mission is part of NATO’s contribution to maritime security and defence against terrorism.
The German Government thus favours a continuation of the operation “under altered circumstances”, as Foreign Minister Steinmeier explained.
In the future, no more than 500 German soldiers should be deployed.
The German Government wants to use the coming months to discuss this with its NATO partners and to develop a new basis for the operation which reflects today’s realities.
Statement by Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier at the first reading in the German Bundestag of the German Government’s motion
to extend Germany’s involvement in supporting NATO integrated air defence in Turkey (Operation Active Fence)
Milestone for children’s rights
That’s when the Optional Protocol enters into force.
The Committee will then decide whether the complaint is admissible and will make recommendations to the child’s home country on how to avoid such human rights infringements in future.
Germany was a main sponsor supporting this new Optional Protocol and was the third state to sign it, early in 2013.
As a result, German children too can benefit from this procedure.
However, the Protocol could only enter into force once it had been ratified by ten countries – and that number was reached on 14 January.
Costa Rica was the tenth country to ratify the Optional Protocol, which will now enter into force on 14 April 2014.
This is a milestone for children’s rights – and an appeal to the other 183 UN member states also to seek ratification.
Route taken by Yanukovych a dead end
The route taken yesterday by President Yanukovych is a dead end.
Restricting civil rights would only distance Ukraine further from Europe.
I am certain that a majority of the Ukrainian people want an open future for their country, in which choosing Europe is still an option.
Repression cannot be the response to a politically contentious debate.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier issued the following statement on the legislation adopted yesterday by the Ukrainian parliament (Verkhovna Rada):
We expect the political leadership in Kyiv to ensure that political debate is not obstructed by administrative means or prosecuted in the courts following the rejection of Ukraine's pro-EU course.
Legislation rushed through parliament in Kyiv yesterday includes worrying restrictions on freedom of assembly and freedom of expression, as well as new requirements affecting the work of non-governmental organisations in Ukraine.
Official website of the organisation
Foreign Minister Steinmeier responds to President Obama’s speech: getting the balance right between security needs and the protection of civil liberties
Foreign Minister Steinmeier:
Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement in Berlin today (17 January) in response to US President Barack Obama’s speech on reforming the US security services:
Montreux a ray of hope for people in Syria
“This is the right decision, even though I can understand that for many opposition members it was a difficult one to take.
President Obama today announced decisions about the restriction and oversight of the American secret services and outlined a process involving Congress and the public.
We welcome this, in part because it provides a basis for the even wider discussion that has already been under way for some time in the United States.
I trust that America will have the strength to get the balance right between legitimate security needs and the protection of civil liberties.
Even the slightest progress on humanitarian access or local ceasefires would count as a success.”
Madam President, Members of this House,
As you know, the mandate for Bundeswehr involvement in Operation Active Endeavour came to an end on 31 December last year.
Following the decision by the Syrian opposition’s National Coalition to attend the Montreux conference, Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement in Berlin this evening (18 January):
For people in Syria to whom civil war and displacement have brought so much suffering, Montreux offers a small ray of hope.
We must make sure the Syria conference isn’t a one-off affair but a process in which we explore systematically and patiently how headway might be made towards a political solution.
However some people may wish to see it, this constitutes a break.
It is not simply more of the same.
As the NATO rationale had it at the time, it serves as a defence against the terrorist threat in the Mediterranean.
It demonstrates, however, that the international community firmly rejects the culture of impunity for murder and terrorism in Lebanon.”
Important to factor in situation in Lebanon
It was therefore important to prevent Lebanon becoming a mere pawn of the warring factions in Syria.
There they had the chance to forcefully put their legitimate demands.
German support for Special Tribunal for Lebanon
The Special Tribunal is the first international court to be charged with investigating a terrorist attack.
Voluntary contributions by UN member countries supply 51% of its funding and 49% is supplied by Lebanon.
Since 2009 a German national has been attached to the Office of the Prosecutor as “Senior Trial Counsel”.
Firm rejection of the culture of impunity
On 16 January the trial in connection with the murder of former Lebanese Prime Minister Hariri started before the Special Tribunal for Lebanon.
On 16 January 2014 the trial in connection with the murder of former Lebanese Prime Minister Hariri started before the Special Tribunal for Lebanon.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier commented in Berlin as follows:
“After years of extremely complex preparations, the trial of those charged with the assassination of Rafiq Hariri has finally begun before an international tribunal in The Hague.
I am under no illusions that this is going to be a lengthy and also difficult trial.
Syria conflict:
Steinmeier emphasised, too, that Lebanon was one of the victims of the Syrian civil war.
“Whatever we do to stabilise the situation in Syria, (we must) always factor in how it will affect Lebanon,” he warned.
With regard to the Syria conference due to start on 22 January in Montreux, near Geneva, Steinmeier renewed his appeal for the moderate opposition forces in Syria to take part.
“Montreux offers the only realistic prospect right now of getting the process of ending the violence in Syria started.”
The Special Tribunal for Lebanon is an ad hoc court established by the United Nations to investigate the deadly attack in 2005 on former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri, in which also 22 other people died.
Germany has supported the Special Tribunal from the start with both personnel and funding.
Since the Tribunal’s establishment the German Government has made over 6 million euros available to it; a further one million euro will be available in 2014.
In the Tribunal’s first few years Germany provided two experts to serve in the Office of the Prosecutor.
Not even Operation Active Endeavour’s rules of engagement provide for any powers of intervention to counter terrorist threats.
Instead, the whole operation has morphed into a reconnaissance and observation mission, a platform for cooperation with the southern Mediterranean countries.
What makes it a break?
Well, we have to have a shared interest in maintaining as complete a picture as possible of the situation in the Mediterranean, in observing where potential risks might develop, where important changes are taking place that need to be taken into account.
The way I see it, there is a considerable disparity between the original mandate and what the operation is really doing today.
We need to exert an influence, politically, on that situation.
We have therefore reached a number of conclusions and made some changes to the mandate before you today.
I say that only because we all know the realities on the ground for this operation are very different now, and have been for some years.
For example, we have removed those powers which are no longer justified by realities on the ground.
This affects the monitoring of shipping, and it affects support for specific NATO operations in response to terrorist activities, as they were described early on.
We have reduced the running time to eleven months, to make clear once again that this is intended as something of a transitional mandate.
The Foreign and Defence Ministers now need to negotiate with our colleagues in NATO.
I believe we will meet with a lot of support from many of our NATO partners.
As we all know, though, NATO adheres to the principle of unanimity.
I ask you to vote in favour of the motion.
The meeting takes place two days before the international peace conference opens in Montreux, near Geneva.
With regard to the participation of the Syrian opposition, Steinmeier hoped that the National Coalition would stick to its decision to take part.
Focus on Iran and the Central African Republic
Foreign Minister Steinmeier made clear that the Council would await the evaluation of the IAEA to determine how far Iran was adhering to its commitments.
“We Europeans and neighbours should be grateful that the French have tried (...) to prevent things getting even worse.”
The foreign ministers will also discuss the situation in Ukraine following the recent escalation of violence there.
Other issues on the agenda will be Egypt, the Middle East peace process, Afghanistan, Russia and South Sudan.
We are proposing a motion today to request approval for the continuation of Germany’s involvement, albeit with some changes in the conditions.
Well, the operation I am talking about was decided on more than twelve years ago in response to the terrorist attacks of 9/11.
It was founded on the right to self-defence enshrined in the UN charter and the obligation under Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty to render assistance.
We are not alone in our assessment that the terrorist threat in the Mediterranean is extremely low these days – many of our partners in NATO share it.
In that form, it remains in my view a useful and up-to-date-mission.
What makes it useful and up to-date?
That monitoring and that information is provided by the mission we are asking you to approve today.
We have reduced the maximum number of our soldiers to be involved at any one time from 700 to 500.
We are using this text to develop the mandate – but we also want to point out that the mandate itself needs to be grounded in an up-dated rationale.
More than twelve years since 9/11, the mutual defence clause can no longer provide a viable legal basis for the longterm; what we need to do now is create the legal basis for the kind of observation and surveillance mission I have outlined today.
We therefore need to direct our efforts chiefly at persuading two NATO partners who do not as yet share our opinion, and as I see it, we need to aim to create a correct and up-to-date legal basis for an observation mission by the end of the year.
EU foreign ministers in Brussels
The backdrop to today’s deliberations are the planned Syria conference on Wednesday, developments in the conflict over Iran’s nuclear programme and the situation in the Central African Republic.
The backdrop to today’s deliberations by the foreign ministers of EU member states are the planned Syria conference on Wednesday, developments in the conflict over Iran’s nuclear programme and the situation in the Central African Republic.
Before the start of today’s meeting, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier emphasised that in view of the recent escalation in Ukraine, the situation there would also be a topic of discussion.
At their meeting today the foreign ministers of the 28 EU member states will be dealing with several complex issues on the international agenda.
At the Foreign Affairs Council chaired by EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs Catherine Ashton they will be addressing also the situation in Syria.
One of the aims of the Foreign Affairs Council is therefore to prepare the ground for the so-called Geneva II conference.
This morning Foreign Minister Steinmeier once again emphasised the need to be “very realistic” about what could be achieved at the conference.
In recent weeks the negotiations with Iran on its nuclear programme have made headway. The important thing now is for Iran to fulfil the obligations it has entered into under the Plan of Action.
“If the IAEA’s evaluation is positive here,” he continued, “we will have conclusions to draw, just as the Americans will have conclusions to draw, as regards easing the sanctions.”
In view of the conflict situation in the Central African Republic, the foreign ministers will be discussing at their meeting what political and humanitarian assistance can be provided to help people on the ground.
The foreign ministers will discuss various ways of providing the support France has requested from its European partners.
One of the suggestions is a possible stopgap mission conducted under Common Security and Defence Policy auspices.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier believes the meeting will serve to sound out the views of France’s EU neighbours concerning such support.
Agenda of the EU Foreign Affairs Council, 20 January 2014, PDF | 66 KB
EU Fact Sheet:
Since being drawn up, it has been signed by 183 countries, 161 of which have ratified it.
The only multilateral instrument designed to tackle missile proliferation
While the possession of military missile technology is neither prohibited nor restricted under the Code, such possession is linked to a set of principles and confidence-building measures (aimed at transparency in particular and including, for example, prior notification of missile launches and annual declarations with respect to national ballistic missile programmes). States subscribing to the Code also commit themselves to curb the proliferation of military missile technology through multilateral, bilateral and national endeavours.
As yet, however, a number of major countries possessing missile technology have failed to subscribe to the Code, so that its impact to date has been limited even though it already has some 136 Subscribing States.
Another problem is the inadequate implementation of transparency measures by some Subscribing States.
In line with its strategy against the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, the EU is campaigning actively for the implementation and universalisation of the HCOC.
In the interest of strengthening the only multilateral arms control instrument that currently exists in the ballistic missile sector, the German Government will continue to press for the full implementation, universalisation and further development of the HCOC.
Minister of State Roth visits The Hague
EU and Federal Government activity
Minister of State Roth and Foreign Minister Timmermans
The Netherlands and Germany are close friends and enjoy good neighbourly relations.
Hague Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation (HCOC)
The worldwide proliferation of missile systems – especially ballistic missile systems capable of delivering weapons of mass destruction – creates regional instabilities and also threatens global security.
Apart from export control instruments, the Hague Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation (HCOC) adopted at a specially convened conference in 2002 is the only multilateral arms control mechanism to date aimed at creating an inventory of missile holdings.
In 2010 and again in 2012, EU‑sponsored resolutions on the HCOC were approved by the First Committee of the UN General Assembly.
Through both EU and bilateral channels the German Government has sought to persuade non‑subscribing States of the HCOC’s merits.
At the HCOC Annual Meetings, including the most recent in Vienna from 30 to 31 May 2013, we have played an active role, presenting proposals for enhancing its mechanisms and encouraging non‑subscribing states to sign up to the Code.
An Immediate Central Contact (ICC) for the HCOC has been established at the Austrian Foreign Ministry:
Following the recent escalation of tensions in Ukraine, the situation there was also discussed.
At the Foreign Affairs Council chaired by EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs Catherine Ashton they addressed also the situation in Syria.
The meeting took place two days before the international peace conference is due to open in Montreux, near Geneva.
After their meeting, Roth issued the following statement:
Minister of State Roth went on to say that the European elections were another topic of their discussions.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier once again emphasised the need to be “very realistic” about what could be achieved at the conference.
Together we want to work towards creating a Europe of shared values, which is characterised by growth based on solidarity, employment, education and social cohesion.
In recent weeks the negotiations with Iran on its nuclear programme have made headway.
In his talks with the Dutch Foreign Minister, Minister of State Roth also confirmed his intention to make progress on establishing an improved mechanism to protect fundamental values in Europe.
In the evening Minister of State Roth travelled on to Belgium.
Trouble spots in Africa
They also pledged to continue the ongoing support for Mali.
In this connection the foreign ministers adopted Council conclusions expressing grave concern over the recent restrictions on the rights of association and expression and calling for deescalation.
Steinmeier and Rasmussen in Brussels
While in Brussels Foreign Minister Steinmeier also paid a first call on NATO Secretary General Anders Fogh Rasmussen.
These are countries which possessed some degree of nuclear technology at the time the Treaty was negotiated.
Eight of these Annex 2 countries have yet to ratify.
Franco-German Day provides an opportunity to discuss with the pupils the significance of these events for the friendship between our two countries and their contribution to the debate on the future of Europe.
Minister of State Roth and Ambassador Gourdault-Montagne will be welcomed by their hosts, headmasters Daniel Bourgel and Bernhard Frank.
Minister of State for Europe Michael Roth travelled to The Hague today as part of a series of first official visits to Germany’s partners in Europe.
In The Hague he met the Dutch Foreign Minister, Frans Timmermans, who welcomed him at the seat of the Dutch Government.
An example of this is the two countries’ cooperation on border issues. In an initiative to strengthen cross-border cooperation, several German and Dutch districts and communities have joined to form five European regions ("Euregios").
Members of the German and Dutch Governments and Parliaments consult each other on a regular basis. The two countries are linked in many different ways in the spheres of politics and business and they cooperate closely within the EU.
Their close relationship was also reflected in the talks between Minister of State Roth and Foreign Minister Timmermans.
My exchange of views with Foreign Minister Timmermans was another indication of the excellent relations between Germany and the Netherlands.
We discussed ways in which we might further strengthen cooperation between our two countries this year.
It is no coincidence that, in 2014, the Netherlands is the partner country of the Hannover Messe.
Our neighbour is a country where high-tech industry is flourishing, which is very important for the German job market.
The best way to bolster the idea of Europe
That is the best way to keep people in Europe on the side of our common project.
The Netherlands has been a close partner to the German Government in this endeavour from the beginning.
German-Dutch relations
Wide-ranging agenda at EU Foreign Affairs Council
EU foreign ministers meet in Brussels
At their meeting today EU foreign ministers focused on the planned Syria conference, the easing of sanctions against Iran and the conflict in the Central African Republic.
At their meeting today the foreign ministers of the 28 EU member states considered the planned Syria conference on Wednesday, issues concerning the easing of sanctions against Iran and how to respond to the current crisis in the Central African Republic.
In the view of Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier, participants had been very focused on the issues at stake.
The foreign ministers of the 28 EU member states have been dealing with several complex issues on the international agenda.
One of the aims of the meeting was to prepare the ground for this so-called Geneva II conference.
With regard to the participation of the Syrian opposition, he hoped the latest “turbulences” would not jeopardise its participation.
the only hopeful sign
Following today’s positive evaluation by the IAEA of Iran’s implementation of the Plan of Action, EU foreign ministers agreed to ease the sanctions against the country.
Pointing to this progress, Foreign Minister Steinmeier noted that Iran was the “only hopeful sign” in the region.
In view of the conflict situation in the Central African Republic, the foreign ministers discussed what political and humanitarian assistance can be provided to help people on the ground.
After the meeting Steinmeier emphasised that a joint EU operation was something the EU foreign ministers could envisage.
They also discussed the situation in Ukraine following the recent escalation of violence in this Eastern European country.
They also gave a renewed assurance that the Association Agreement with the EU remains on the table.
First official call on NATO Secretary General Rasmussen
A very friendly welcome:
They had in-depth talks on current security challenges and how NATO is responding to them.
They also briefly discussed the upcoming NATO summit in Wales as well as the end of the ISAF mission in Afghanistan and the international communityForeign Minister Steinmeier’s post-2014 engagement there.
Rasmussen voiced his appreciation of Germany’s participation in NATO operations in Afghanistan, Kosovo and elsewhere.
Council conclusions on Syria PDF | 85 KB
Council decision on Iran PDF | 64 KB
Terms for the agreement on a Joint Plan of Action, including measures to be undertaken by the European Union PDF | 64 KB
Council conclusions on Afghanistan PDF | 86 KB
The group comprises 14 prominent experts, including Wolfgang Hoffmann of Germany, who served as the Preparatory Commission’s first Executive Secretary.
Intergovernmental conferences are held every two years (most recently in New York on 27 September 2013) with the aim of facilitating the Treaty’s entry into force in accordance with Article XIV.
They meet for consultations in Geneva and primarily prepare the informal meetings of CTBT Foreign Ministers which are held every two years.
22 January is Franco-German Day.
Minister of State Roth will discuss with pupils in Berlin
Michael Roth, Minister of State for Europe, and French Ambassador Maurice Gourdault-Montagne will meet pupils from the French Grammar School in Berlin on Wednesday, 22 January.
In 2014 we will be commemorating three events which have had a significant impact on Europe as it is today: the centenary of the outbreak of the First World War, the 75th anniversary of the outbreak of the Second World War and the 25th anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall.
The CTBTO established to implement the Treaty is based in Vienna. It is recognised as an international organisation and is functioning on a provisional basis pending the Treaty’s entry into force.
After the tsunami on 26 December 2004, the stations began to make their data available for civil and research purposes as well.
In addition, the BGR has assumed the role of National Data Centre.
The PrepCom’s task is to prepare for the CTBT’s entry into force and put in place a monitoring system that can register nuclear explosions all over the world.
The office of Executive Secretary has been held by Dr Lassina Zerbo (Burkina Faso) since 1 August 2013.
The CTBT provides for a global monitoring system to verify compliance with the test ban.
A further 80 radionuclide monitoring stations, supported by 16 radionuclide laboratories, can examine air samples for radioactive substances.
These inspections are regularly conducted by the CTBTO.
The German Government has three experts taking part, who have been involved in the preparations already under way.
That is the aim of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT), which has not yet entered into force.
The CTBT is a major building block in the nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regime,
as well as an important complement to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT).
The CTBT aims to prevent the development and procurement of nuclear weapons by non-nuclear-weapon states.
The CTBT was approved by UN Resolution 50/245 on 10 September 1996 and opened for signature by all states two weeks later, on 24 September.
This, however, already makes them members of the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization (CTBTO) in Vienna.
All EU member states have ratified the Treaty, as have all NATO and G8 members apart from the United States.
Both in its own right and together with its EU partners and the Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative (NPDI), the German Government is pressing the eight “hold-out” states in particular to take the steps required for the Treaty to enter into force.
The new Executive Secretary of the CTBTO Preparatory Commission, Dr Lassina Zerbo, set up a Group of Eminent Persons in August 2013 which is to actively push for the CTBT’s entry into force, primarily addressing the Annex 2 countries.
In the alternate years – most recently on 27 September 2012 – the Foreign Ministers of the Signatory States issue a joint statement on the fringes of the UN General Assembly calling for the Treaty’s entry into force.
As a constant supporter of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, Germany was made a member of the Friends of the CTBT in May 2013.
The Foreign Ministers’ next informal meeting will be held in autumn 2014.
The CTBTO Preparatory Commission
The CTBTO Preparatory Commission, or PrepCom, was established to cover the time until the CTBT enters into force.
It consists of a plenary body and a number of working groups, in which all the States Parties are represented, alongside the Provisional Technical Secretariat (PTS) based in Vienna.
The CTBTO’s budget for 2013 (as of 6 December 2013) amounted to some 44.6 million US dollars plus 55.7 million euros. Germany provided 8.1% (approx. 7.5 million euros) of the total sum, making it the third-largest contributor after the United States and Japan.
The CTBTO’s unique verification system – a global network of 337 planned monitoring stations, nearly 87% of which are now operational, as well as 16 laboratories – allows it already at this stage to detect even minor underground nuclear detonations anywhere in the world.
The 170 seismic, 60 infrasound and 11 hydroacoustic monitoring stations are intended to register the seismic and acoustic waves triggered by any nuclear explosion.
The CTBTO monitoring system played a vital role in the discovery of the North Korean nuclear tests of February 2013.
As in the case of the March 2011 earthquake and tsunami disaster in Japan, the CTBTO now also routinely transmits its monitoring data to disaster-early-warning organisations.
Five German stations are part of the International Monitoring System – two seismological and two infrasound stations operated by the Federal Institute for Geosciences and Natural Resources (BGR) as well as the radionuclide station operated by the Institute for Atmospheric Radioactivity (IAR) of the Federal Office for Radiation Protection.
The Bundeswehr Institute for Underwater Sound and Geophysical Research brings its expertise to bear in the field of hydroacoustics.
On-site inspections
After it enters into force, the Treaty will also make it possible to carry out on-site inspections in the States Parties.
If a suspicious incident cannot be cleared up by means of dialogue, every State Party has the right to request an on-site inspection.
If an on-site inspection finds evidence pointing to a nuclear test explosion, the incident is reported to the States Parties and, if necessary, to the United Nations.
The next field training exercise, to take place in Jordan, is planned for November 2014.
Brochure on CTBT on-site inspections:
Joint declaration by Federal Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier and French Foreign Minister Laurent Fabius on Franco-German cooperation
At their meeting in Paris today, French Foreign Minister Laurent Fabius and Federal Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier reiterated their shared intention to significantly intensify cooperation between France and Germany.
They agreed the following:
– The Ministers will consult one another routinely before meetings of the EU Foreign Affairs Council and the EU General Affairs Council.
Afterwards the Ministers can report on these trips to the relevant Assemblée nationale and Bundestag committees.
– The Ministers have agreed to drive forward cooperation on the early identification of crises and on crisis prevention.
– With a view to the European elections, the Ministers intend to join forces in working to convey the significance of Europe to the citizens in France and Germany.
This meeting also gave both Ministers the opportunity to define the main issues which lend themselves to close cooperation between their two countries, particularly with regard to the Franco-German Council of Ministers on 19 February.
Minister of State Roth in Belgium
Minister of State Roth and Foreign Minister Reynders
– The Ministers will plan joint trips to regions of particular interest to both countries and the European Union.
– The Ministers will examine specific options for the co‑location of diplomatic missions abroad.
Germany and France working side by side for Europe
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier has travelled to Paris to prepare the upcoming Franco-German Council of Ministers.
The Foreign Ministers have agreed to inject new momentum into Franco-German cooperation and have approved concrete steps to achieve this.
In Paris Federal Foreign Minister Steinmeier and his French counterpart Fabius have agreed on concrete steps to significantly intensify Franco-German cooperation.
Talks with his French counterpart Laurent Fabius focused on the form future cooperation between the two countries should take.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and his French counterpart Fabius
For, as the German Foreign Minister stated,
“As Foreign Ministers, Laurent Fabius and I have a special responsibility to nurture and develop Franco-German relations.”
The welcome at the French Foreign Ministry, the Quai d’Orsay, was warm.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier said that he felt “almost at home at the Quai”.
At the start of his trip Foreign Minister Steinmeier had already emphasised,
At their meeting on 21 January Steinmeier and Fabius were keen “to inject new momentum into this alliance”.
In a joint declaration by the two Foreign Ministers, both pledge to strengthen bilateral cooperation and cite specific areas on which they plan to focus.
Press conference with Steinmeier and Fabius
The Ministers also plan to undertake joint visits to neighbours of the EU.
Their first trip is to be to Moldova and Georgia.
Both countries are partner countries within the context of the EU’s Eastern Partnership.
The European Union recently initialled association agreements with both countries.
With regard to joint events, Foreign Minister Steinmeier stressed that he and his counterpart Fabius had “the ambition and the desire” to work together during the anniversary year of the start of the First World War.
The bilateral meeting was also an opportunity for the two Ministers to define the main issues that lend themselves to closer cooperation and to prepare the next Franco-German Council of Ministers.
International conflicts:
The focus in Paris was also on European and international issues.
Both are travelling to Switzerland to attend the conference on Syria, which starts on Wednesday.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier reiterated that expectations should be “realistic”.
More on the Syria conference in Montreux
The two Ministers also discussed Mali and the Central African Republic.
but that France must not be left to go it alone.
Joint declaration by Federal Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier and French Foreign Minister Laurent Fabius on Franco-German cooperation, 21 January 2014 PDF | 10 KB
He added that the fact that the German and French Foreign Ministers were meeting so frequently to discuss bilateral and foreign policy issues testified to the significance of Franco-German cooperation.
Pulling in the same direction – working for Europe
Among other things, the Ministers agree in future to consult one another routinely before the specialist meetings of the EU foreign ministers in Brussels.
Steinmeier and Fabius agreed that their initial experience of this in preparation for the EU Foreign Affairs Council had already been worthwhile.
In addition, the Ministers agreed to join forces to promote Europe in the run-up to the elections for the European Parliament.
Syria and sub-Saharan Africa
Steinmeier and Fabius exchanged their views on the current trouble spots in sub-Saharan Africa and the Middle East.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier stressed that we must be grateful for France’s engagement there,
Both Ministers agreed that the Foreign Ministers meeting had also been an important day for Europe to join forces in shouldering responsibility.
Peace conference for Syria
Foreign Minister Steinmeier is attending the Syria conference in Montreux today.
In advance of the event, he stressed that we owe it to the victims in Syria to work resolutely towards a solution to the conflict.
Foreign Ministers Venizelos, Steinmeier and Fabius in Montreux
Foreign Minister Steinmeier is attending the Syria conference in Montreux today.
The civil war and the bloodshed in Syria have been going on for three years now, and the situation there remains dramatic.
The peace conference is being held in the Montreux Palace hotel
In this way it would be possible to lay the "first small foundations" for further talks in the coming weeks and months.
After meeting his French counterpart Laurent Fabius in Paris, Steinmeier warned yesterday against getting our hopes too high.
Today the Minister stated as follows:
On Franco-German Day Minister of State Roth discussed the future of Franco-German relations and Europe with pupils of the Französisches Gymnasium Berlin.
I hope it will be possible in the present situation to prevent any further escalation and perhaps also to create islands of calm in Syria itself, where humanitarian organisations can for the first time in years gain access to the people in need of their help.
Resolutely pursuing the political path
Minister of State Roth with pupils of the Französisches Gymnasium Berlin
Although the prospect of an imminent breakthrough in the talks is remote, Steinmeier believes the international community should not diminish its efforts to bring about a political solution to the conflict. He continued:
But this had nothing to do with regular classes.
On arriving at the school, Roth noted how much he was looking forward to a discussion with young people.
In my opinion we are not at liberty to give in to resignation, especially in light of the images of tortured and murdered people that have emerged from Syria in the last few days.
Even if we don't make the desired progress today,
They in turn were obviously pleased to have a chance to talk to the Minister of State for Europe.
we owe it to the victims in Syria to work with tenacity and resolution towards a political process in order to end the killing in Syria.
Creating opportunities for humanitarian assistance
New dynamic in Franco-German relations
The additional funds will mainly be used to continue and expand humanitarian projects run by German NGOs.
Further goals:
A ceasefire and the formation of a transitional government
Another important goal of the Montreux conference is to bring about a ceasefire in Syria.
In their final communiqué, the core group representatives also spoke out in favour of a political solution to the Syria conflict.
The situation in Syria: An overview
Group of Friends of the Syrian People meets in Paris (12 January 2014)
In advance of the event, he stressed that we owe it to the victims in Syria to work resolutely towards a political process in order to end the killing in Syria.
Creating islands of calm
Responsibility for Europe
Lively discussion with Minister of State Roth
They asked critical questions about current topics on the European agenda such as the treatment of refugees, relations with Turkey and a possible European engagement in Mali and the Central African Republic.
On 8 January the appointment of Minister of State Roth as Commissioner for Franco-German Cooperation received Cabinet approval.
He is responsible, together with his French counterpart Thierry Repentin, for coordinating Franco-German cooperation at government level.
More than 40 delegations and international organisations are meeting in Montreux from today Wednesday to discuss a political solution to the conflict.
Before the conference, Steinmeier repeated that he wasn't expecting any miracles today – but the fact that the talks were being held was important enough.
Last week Foreign Minister Steinmeier announced that Germany would make available another 80 million euros for humanitarian assistance in Syria.
On 12 January, the core group of the Group of Friends of the Syrian People met in Paris to prepare the Montreux peace conference.
The Group of Friends consists of more than 100 countries, among them Germany, the USA, France and Britain.
Franco-German Day in Berlin
On this year's Franco-German Day Minister of State for Europe Roth had a lively discussion with pupils of the Französisches Gymnasium Berlin on the future of Franco-German relations and Europe.
On 8 January Roth was appointed also Commissioner for Franco-German Cooperation.
There was great hustle and bustle this morning at the Französisches Gymnasium Berlin.
To mark Franco-German Day on 22 January, the school in Berlin's Tiergarten district had invited Minister of State Roth together with the French Ambassador, Maurice Gourdault-Montaigne to be its guests.
The main focus of the visit was a discussion with 23 final-grade pupils.
After a brief tour of the school in the company of its two directors, Daniel Bourgel and Bernhard Frank, Roth greeted the young people assembled for the discussion.
Both Ambassador Gourdault-Montaigne and Minister of State Roth emphasised that there was now a new dynamic in Franco-German relations,
as yesterday's visit by Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier to his Paris counterpart Fabius had made clear.
Minister of State Roth also drew attention to the significance of Franco-German friendship in the light of this year's commemoration of the outbreak of World War I.
While it might seem a matter of course to the young people present, he noted, this friendship between former “arch-enemies” was in fact something very special.
Today's Europe, Roth pointed out, was essentially a peace and emancipation project that had grown out of that grim legacy.
There followed a lively discussion, in which the issues raised by the young participants made clear that Franco-German relations and the future of Europe are things they feel very strongly about.
In Paris, too, by the way, young people are invited to take part in a similar discussion. On 22 January French Minister Delegate for European Affairs Thierry Repentin is hosting a group of French and German pupils.
Read more on the website of the French Foreign Ministry
An important priority here is promoting contacts and interaction between civil society in both countries.
Franco-German Day was proclaimed in 2003 to mark the signing of the Élysée Treaty on Franco-German cooperation in 1963.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement in Montreux today (22 January):
Foreign Minister Steinmeier on the situation in Ukraine
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier has just been on the phone to Ukraine’s Foreign Minister Leonid Kozhara.
He released the following statement on the difficult situation in Ukraine on the fringes of the Syria Conference in Montreux today (22 January):
“These are terrible pictures that have been emerging from the Ukrainian capital overnight.
This morning’s reports of deaths are devastating.
We direct that message to both sides.
To President Yanukovych, however, we also clearly state that
it will not do to make the response of Ukraine’s leaders a violent one that brings more people to harm.
I can understand the Opposition’s sense of frustration, when they have been feeling for days and weeks that nothing is changing, that the Government and the President have not given any meaningful ground.
That said, we hold and will stand by the view that violence is not a solution.
Minister of State for Europe Michael Roth today visited the Belgian capital Brussels and met with Belgian Foreign Minister Didier Reynders.
Brussels is not only the capital of the EU:
Minister of State for Europe Michael Roth visited the Belgian capital Brussels today to continue the Federal Government’s contacts with Belgian Foreign Minister Didier Reynders and the EU institutions, shortly after Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s first official visit on 7 January.
After the meeting, Roth reaffirmed that 2014 will be a year of very intensive exchange between Belgium and Germany – not least because of the visit the Belgian King and Queen will pay to Berlin in February.
He added that it was important to see Brussels not only as the EU’s capital "but also as the capital of a creative and extremely diverse country to which we are very close in many respects".
The Minister of State said that the commemoration of the outbreak of World War I was also an important topic they discussed. He went on to say:
There are hardly any other places where the suffering and the horrors of that catastrophe can be felt in such a direct and shocking way than the former Belgian battlefields.
100 years after the outbreak of World War I, 75 years after Germany’s invasion of Poland and 25 years after the fall of the Berlin Wall, European unification is an inescapable lesson learnt from history.
Together with our European partners, we want to remind people of this in the year to come.
Subsequently, Minister of State Roth held talks with representatives of the European Parliament and with László Andor, Commissioner for Social Affairs, and Maroš Šefčovič, Vice-President of the Commission.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier attended the Syria conference in Montreux on Wednesday.
The UN General Assembly adopted the Arms Trade Treaty by a large majority on 2 April 2013.
The Treaty will enter into force as soon as 50 countries have ratified it.
It covers large-calibre artillery systems, combat aircraft and missiles as well as small arms and light weapons.
Syria peace conference in Montreux
Among other things, it provides that prior to exporting any of these items supplier countries must assess whether the weapons could be used to seriously violate human rights or international humanitarian law.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier attended the Syria conference in the Swiss town of Montreux today.
In his speech, he called on both Syrian delegations to be courageous and serious in their quest for peace.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier on the Cabinet decision regarding the provisional application of the Arms Trade Treaty
In his speech to the delegates, Steinmeier called on both Syrian delegations to be courageous and serious in their quest for peace in Syria.
The Arms Trade Treaty is an important milestone in the regulation of the global arms trade.
Germany has decided to move forward and provisionally apply the Treaty.
By doing so, we hope to persuade other states to follow suit, thus making the world a little bit safer.
On Wednesday, more than 40 delegations and international organisations attended the start of a conference in Montreux to discuss a political solution to the conflict.
After meeting his French counterpart Laurent Fabius in Paris, Steinmeier had already warned the day before against getting our hopes too high.
The Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) is intended to enable us to tackle the completely uncontrolled proliferation of small arms and light weapons, which has contributed to the escalation of so many conflicts.
The Treaty is the first to set global binding minimum standards for the international trade with conventional weapons: from pistols to tanks.
The Cabinet decided today to apply the provisions of the Arms Trade Treaty on a provisional basis.
Germany has been a keen advocate of the Treaty since the start of the negotiating process in 2006.
Germany was also one of the first countries to sign it.
The corresponding German law approving the Treaty entered into force on 26 October 2013 after it was adopted unanimously in the Bundestag.
During his visit to Paris on 21 January, Foreign Minister Steinmeier and his French colleague Fabius discussed concrete areas in which Franco-German cooperation can be further strengthened.
Laurent and I pledged right at our first meeting that we would give this alliance new momentum.
We need to do this in a credible way, not just talk about it.
Germany will deposit the instrument of ratification as soon as the EU decision upon which this is contingent has been taken. That is expected to happen in spring 2014.
In this connection, the German Government will also issue a declaration on the provisional application of the ATT.
The aim is to make the deep friendship between Germany and France a little closer yet.
Foreign Ministers Venizelos, Steinmeier and Fabius
In his speech to the delegates, Steinmeier emphasised the responsibility borne by the Syrian Government for the disaster in Syria.
The next important date in this process of bilateral coordination is already clear:
the Franco-German Council of Ministers will be meeting in Paris on 19 February.
He went on to say that while the long-term goal was to negotiate a transitional governing body with full executive powers, the suffering of the Syrian people had to be alleviated immediately.
He thus called on both parties to agree on local ceasefires, the exchange of prisoners, and unimpeded humanitarian access to all places in Syria.
Parties have to create conditions that permit effective aid
He repeated that Germany stood ready, as it had done throughout, to help its Syrian friends - but the conditions for effective aid could only, he said, be provided for by the parties to the conflict themselves.
In conclusion, the German Foreign Minister called on the two Syrian delegations to be courageous and serious in their quest for peace.
He noted that the Syrian National Coalition had already proven its courage by coming to the conference, against many odds and in the face of ongoing violence.
Steinmeier hoped that all delegations would display the same sense of responsibility for the Syrian people.
Full text of Foreign Minister Steinmeier's speech in Montreux
Steinmeier held numerous bilateral talks on the sidelines of the conference. His interlocutors included Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu of Turkey and Lakhdar Brahimi, the UN-Arab League Joint Special Representative for Syria.
It is also hoped that the event will make progress on the formation of a transitional government with full executive powers.
Germany increases humanitarian assistance for Syria (15 January 2014)
Germany will thus provisionally apply the core passages of the Treaty – Articles 6 and 7 – which lay down the criteria for assessing arms export applications.
To date, it has been signed by 116 states and ratified by nine countries.
To inject new momentum into Franco-German relations: that was the motive behind Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier’s trip to Paris on 21 January to see his French counterpart Laurent Fabius.
Meeting in the Quai d’Orsay, the French Foreign Ministry, the two Ministers talked in an atmosphere of trust about a fresh start for the special partnership between Germany and France.
That’s why I am in complete agreement when Laurent Fabius says we need to back up this intention in our policymaking.
With that in mind, I think we’re justified in taking our thinking a bit further, in trying to break out of the routine, in trying to shake off some of the routine in the relationship between our countries and trying to go a little further than we may have done or dared to do in the past.
Among the concrete measures agreed by Steinmeier and Fabius were systematic coordination between the two countries in the run-up to Foreign Affairs Council meetings and joint visits to Europe’s neighbouring regions.
The two Ministers also want to campaign together for Europe and Europe’s future.
I think this is the third time in a fortnight that I’ve visited you here in the Quai d’Orsay.
It’s almost beginning to feel like home.
German radio in Turkey
Thanks to the combined efforts of the German Embassy, Goethe-Institut and DAAD, Alman Usulü now goes on air once a week.
The political staff of the Federal Foreign Office are now all in their posts.
He also ceremonially discharged outgoing State Secretary Emily Haber and her former colleague Harald Braun.
With the handover to the new State Secretaries, the political staff of the Federal Foreign Office is again at full strength only a few weeks after Foreign Minister Steinmeier himself assumed office.
That was exactly what happened one day in July 2013.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier turned to the departing and incoming State Secretaries with a few solemn words.
One might think, he said, that change is nothing special for a democracy, and especially not for an organisation like the Federal Foreign Office, in which members of staff are constantly changing desks and posts.
Looking back on a period of change
Foreign Minister Steinmeier thanked the outgoing State Secretaries and commended them for their achievements.
wished them both luck and success in their new posts.
I was visiting the editorial offices of one of Ankara’s leading radio stations, RadyoODTÜ, run by the prestigious Middle East Technical University (METU).
(Pictured from left to right):
Former State Secretary Harald Braun, State Secretary Emily Haber, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier, State Secretary Stephan Steinlein, State Secretary Markus Ederer
In Turkey the thing to do on such occasions is drink tea and discuss all sorts of things, the family for a start, usually football as well and then at some stage you get onto politics.
It’s a fantastic experience and each time I learn a huge amount!
But this time it was different.
She was given a standing ovation by the audience of Foreign Office staff.
Looking forward to new challenges
The new State Secretaries Ederer and Steinlein then both addressed the large audience. They talked primarily about current political challenges and thanked Foreign Minister Steinmeier for their appointments.
The packed Weltsaal
State Secretary Ederer started off by saying that in his previous post as EU Ambassador in Beijing he had come to question our view of the world,
noting that the globe looks very different from China.
He underscored that in the present day political solutions were more vital than ever given the emergence of complex problems
such as cyber-crime and climate change.
And if you see every opportunity as basically a problem, you won’t achieve very much.
Alman Usulü logo
As you can imagine, we had to get our act together pretty quickly.
Both State Secretaries began their careers in the Federal Foreign Office.
State Secretary Ederer joined the diplomatic service in 1988.
It was all very exciting, as most of us had never worked in radio before.
He held various posts in headquarters and abroad, serving for example as Head of the Policy Planning Staff in the Federal Foreign Office in Berlin.
State Secretary Steinlein started work at the Federal Foreign Office in 1991.
What kind of structure were we aiming for?
What topics would be relevant and of interest?
State Secretary Ederer
State Secretary Steinlein
And what about the music? People have very different tastes, after all.
The design of the show’s logo was inspired by functional considerations.
Alman Usulü – on air every Sunday at 18.00!
Since then we’ve established something of a routine in many respects.
New State Secretaries inaugurated
Foreign Minister Steinmeier has officially inaugurated his new State Secretaries and discharged their predecessors from their duties.
New State Secretaries officially inaugurated
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier installed Markus Ederer and Stephan Steinlein as his State Secretaries at a ceremony in the Weltsaal in the Federal Foreign Office in Berlin on 23 January.
But the number of people present in the Weltsaal today showed that the opposite was true –
the appointment of new State Secretaries wasn’t “an everyday occurrence after all”.
Steinmeier also mentioned the stubborn rumour he had heard that the installation of new State Secretaries made a far greater difference than the appointment of a new Minister.
Speech by Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier at the inauguration of the new State Secretaries
He applauded the professional expertise and personal skills of Drs Haber and Braun, and
Former State Secretary Harald Braun’s remit had included responsibility for the Foreign Office’s Central Directorate-General, i.e. for the personnel divisions and support services.
In this capacity he had, Steinmeier stressed, helped shape numerous reforms.
Dr Braun thanked the Minister for his new post as German Ambassador to the United Nations in New York,
saying that this “dream post” would present him with politically interesting challenges.
Emily Haber, the first female State Secretary in the Federal Foreign Office’s history, recalled the changes the ministry had undergone in the past 30 years, with regard to both gender equality and career development.
Haber is changing ministries and will become State Secretary at the Ministry of the Interior.
State Secretary Steinlein, a self-styled “child (of the revolution) of 1989”, used his speech to emphasise his belief that diplomats should act as “enablers”, bringing movement wherever paralysis had set in.
Looking back on the events he had lived through, he also drew the conclusion that freedom, prosperity and peace have to be won anew every day.
His last post as Ambassador of the European Union to the People’s Republic of China and Mongolia took him to Beijing.
He had previously come to prominence in the East German civil rights movement, serving as the last GDR Ambassador in Paris.
From 2009 he was Steinmeier’s head of office in the latter’s capacity as Chairman of the SPD Parliamentary Group.
The new State Secretaries’ CVs
With everyone doing their particular bit, the whole thing gradually takes shape.
Thirdly, we seem to have a remarkably large audience!
This is trickier than you might think.
Right now it’s a lot of fun, however – and that’s a good basis on which to build!
Alman Usulü:
Once a week our colleague Peter Kettner in Ankara presents a radio show about Germany.
When visiting a Turkish radio station our colleague Peter Kettner in Ankara received an unexpected offer – to host his own radio show.
Visits to editorial offices are all in a day’s work for embassy press officers.
Sometimes, however, routine visits give rise to ideas and ideas to groundbreaking projects.
And often when goodbyes are said there’s talk of doing “something” together, and of course you know this is “something” will be the next cup of tea in a month or two ... and that’s great.
When I asked the editor if we couldn’t perhaps do “something” together, for example, a radio show on Germany, he said,
“fine with me – but only if you do a whole season!
A weekly show in Turkish on some German topic, 40 weeks running.
Oh, and by the way, you start eight weeks from now…” You can guess what my feelings were. What a fantastic opportunity! But we’ll never manage!
Yet that’s part and parcel of our job at the German Embassy – communicating a realistic image of our country in Turkey.
Within two weeks we’d assembled a sizeable team of presenters (six in all) and an even larger editorial team (up to fifteen people) from the Embassy, the Goethe-Institut and the DAAD and got down to work with a vengeance.
So obviously there were quite a few issues we had to sort out.
A name for the show was quickly found, however. Alman Usulü means literally “German style”, but in Turkey it means above all going “Dutch treat” in restaurants (i.e. everyone pays their own bill, something inconceivable to most Turks!).
The first opportunity to publicise our show was the Oktoberfest given by the German Embassy in Ankara, traditionally one of the highlights of the social calendar.
A good way to advertise our show would be beermats, we thought, so our logo should look like and fit onto a beermat.
This proved a great success, so that’s what we’ve stuck to ever since.
Our first show went on air on 22 September, the day of the Bundestag election in Germany. So of course that’s what it was all about –
Germany’s political system, elections, parties, programmes. And it ended with the announcement of the first trends on how people had voted.
We’ve ideas for the themes we want to cover right up to the end of the season. The editorial team meets once a week to decide who’s going to prepare and present each show.
All the same, I still find it very exciting, for three reasons in particular.
The first reason is simply that before every show on which I’m a presenter, I worry about whether my Turkish is up to it, however thoroughly I’ve prepared.
Secondly, I still enormously enjoy the way we work as a team – minimal hierarchy and more as a kind of swarm intelligence.
We don’t have any precise figures as yet, but in the 25-40 age group RadyoODTÜ is the third most popular station in Ankara. Our colleagues there tell us that each show attracts well over 10,000 listeners.
We see Alman Usulü as a valuable new tool complementing what we offer on our website (www.anka.diplo.de), Facebook page (Externer Link, öffnet in neuem Fensterwww.facebook.com/buyukelciligi) and Twitter account (@GermanyinTurkey).
Once created, our content is accessible via all these outlets, so reaching many more people.
Our plans for the future include expanding our promotional merchandise.
In addition to the T-shirts, pens and mugs we give away on the show, we’re now working on a soundtrack.
Who holds the copyright for German songs in Turkey?
What the future holds for Alman Usulü once this season ends we don’t really know yet.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier is visiting Paris today.
The aim of his visit is to prepare the Franco-German Council of Ministers and to talk about the future development of the particularly close partnership with France.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier is travelling to Paris today to prepare the upcoming Franco-German Council of Ministers.
Prior to Franco-German Day talks will focus on the future form of cooperation between the two countries.
Both Ministers agree that they intend to inject new momentum into Franco-German cooperation.
And what does it offer? Any amount of information about German society, culture, politics – and music, too, of course!
Presenters Elmas Coskun, Peter Kettner (German Embassy Ankara) and Noyan Er (RadyoODTÜ)
Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Fabius in Paris on 12 January
Today the two Foreign Ministers will meet for intensive bilateral talks focusing on preparations for the Franco-German Council of Ministers
which is scheduled for 19 February in Paris.
It is intended to mark the new beginning in Franco-German cooperation,
including specific joint projects.
At the start of his trip Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement:
We want to inject relations between Berlin and Paris with new momentum.
Germany and France working side by side will strengthen European foreign policy.
Whenever Germany and France pull in the same direction, Europe moves forward.
Another topic of the talks will be the Franco-German partnership within the framework of European cooperation.
Given the current trouble spots in sub-Saharan Africa and in the Middle East, the ministers will seek to coordinate their positions on these issues, too,
Given the current trouble spots in sub-Saharan Africa and in the Middle East, the ministers will seek to coordinate their positions on these issues, too, which were also on the agenda of yesterday's discussions among EU Foreign Ministers.
It is an honour and a joy for me to work for you as State Secretary.
And I will do everything I can to fulfil the expectations and demands placed on me!
Finally, my thanks go also to you, dear colleagues.
You have welcomed me with open arms for the second time after some years of absence.
I am glad to be back.
“Thank God we’ve finally got rid of him!”
I certainly didn’t, anyway.
I am a child of 1989.
There is in my view only one thing we can advise from here, namely that
Ukraine’s road to an autonomously determined future will definitely not be reached via violence, whosoever perpetrates it.
It is my belief that, however difficult the situation may be, the last remaining chances of a political solution have not yet been exhausted. They need to be sought.
The Ukrainian Ambassador was summoned to the Federal Foreign Office early on Friday afternoon.
Our goal was a united, democratic Europe.
We wanted to create a place where people could take time to reflect on the common future of our continent.
Minister of State Roth on conviction of Chinese civil rights activist Xu
Minister of State Michael Roth issued the following statement today (26 January) on the conviction of Chinese human rights activist Xu Zhiyong:
Steinmeier in Montreux
Government must protect peaceful demonstrators
We hold and will stand by the view that violence is not a solution.
The Government has a duty to protect the peaceful demonstrations.
The Ukrainian Ambassador Pavlo Klimkin was summoned to the Federal Foreign Office early on Friday afternoon.
There are clear ways of starting that search, as I see things:
The Federal Government is greatly concerned about this conviction.
China’s constitution guarantees its citizens human rights and the freedom of demonstration.
EU mediation efforts
In view of the fact that the declared goal of China’s new leaders is to step up the fight against corruption, this sentence can only be met with incomprehension and criticism.
The Verkhovna Rada, the Ukrainian parliament, will convene on Tuesday coming.
As well as Xu, a number of other people who have been active in the New Citizens’ Movement are on trial in Beijing and other cities. It is likely that their sentences will be similarly harsh.
We call upon China’s leaders to strengthen political liberties, the rule of law and transparency and not to disappoint expectations of their willingness to implement reform.
This includes progress in respecting human rights.
Stefan Füle, EU Commissioner responsible for Enlargement, travels to Kyiv today for talks with the parties to the conflict.
It is lamentable that embassy representatives from Western countries were not allowed to observe the trial.
That will be an opportunity for Ukraine’s political leaders to demonstrate sincerity in their offers to the Opposition.
We are in close contact with representatives of both sides, members of the Opposition as well as members of the Government.
I will be engaged in further talks this afternoon.
We are liaising closely with Catherine Ashton and those working on behalf of the European Union to try and prevent further deterioration.
remaining chances of political solution not yet exhausted
As we can see in the televised images emerging from Kyiv and many other parts of Ukraine on a daily basis,
the proposals for stricter laws on restricting political options for parties and individuals, which fly in the face of all Ukraine’s regulations, need to be brought back to the table – they need to be withdrawn or at least fundamentally altered.
Refrain from violence and make every effort to seek a political solution – that, I believe, is what needs to be done at this time.
The German Government’s position was once again made clear to him.
The European Union wants to play a more prominent role with regard to the Ukrainian crisis.
But what impressed me most at the time
was that this man didn’t simply stick to his observer role!
Our enthusiasm spilled over on to him.
This man really made an impression on me.
In the course of my life I had certainly encountered officials who wanted to prevent and control things.
A good diplomat is a facilitator!
He or she is a translator in situations where others are lost for words.
He or she overcomes division and speechlessness.
I spent six years at the Federal Chancellery and four years with the SPD parliamentary group in the Bundestag.
I enjoyed my time there.
Not because you can walk around with your nose in the air when you are a member of the Federal Foreign Office.
Dear Markus, allow me at this point to say a few personal words.
This is a good day for Yemen.
On 26 January, 2014 Chinese human rights activist Xu Zhiyong was sentenced to 4 years in prison by the Beijing No 1 Municipal People’s Court.
Mr Xu had campaigned publicly for greater respect for the rule of law and against abuse of power and corruption, and was arrested in July 2013.
Xu Zhiyong is the founder of the China New Citizens’ Movement, which publicly calls for a crackdown on corruption and revelation of the wealth of high-ranking party officials, as well as ratification of the UN International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
German Government condemns violence in Kyiv,
Nevertheless, he went on:
This success gives cause for new hope that Yemen will continue its peaceful transition along the path mapped out by the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative.
Ukrainian Ambassador summoned to Federal Foreign Office
Ukrainian Ambassador summoned to Federal Foreign Office
Despite freezing temperatures, demonstrations continue in Kyiv.
The protests against the Government have once again escalated this week. There have been brutal street battles and several people have been killed.
The German Government has condemned the acts of violence committed by the Ukrainian Government against the demonstrators.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier also expressed shock at the deaths and called upon the Ukrainian Government not to use violence against peaceful demonstrators.
There had previously been direct talks at the highest level:
during a telephone conversation with President Yanukovych, Federal Chancellor Angela Merkel strongly condemned the violent clashes in Kyiv and called for a “serious dialogue” with the Opposition.
On Wednesday and again on Friday, Foreign Minister Steinmeier spoke on the phone to his Ukrainian counterpart Leonid Kozhara, urging him to immediately stop violence against peaceful demonstrators.
On the margins of the Syria peace conference in Montreaux, Steinmeier stated that he could understand the Ukrainian Opposition's sense of frustration when they had been feeling for days and weeks that the Government had not given any meaningful ground.
He was told that the use of force had to be stopped; moreover the laws that had been hastily adopted had to be seriously re-examined.
Martin Schäfer, the Federal Foreign Office Spokesperson, said that the Ukrainian Ambassador was expected to swiftly inform his Government of this position.
Talks are also being pursued at the multilateral level.
Next week, EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs Catherine Ashton will be travelling to the Ukrainian capital to meet President Yanukovych and members of the Opposition.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier subsequently reiterated his view that the route taken by President Yanukovych was a dead end and that
We specifically pay tribute to President Hadi’s great engagement and his important impetus that made this result possible.
Germany will continue to support its Yemeni partners on this difficult road.
There were always people who knew much more about the individual issues.
self-confidence is good,
The Federal Foreign Office, and this is my first point, has to be a mirror of society.
And these days society is more feminine, more colourful, more varied!
The young people who come to us have higher expectations of their employer in this regard.
And a modern foreign service has to be open to this possibility.
the foreign policy agenda is shifting.
New issues are coming to the fore.
Third:
New hope for peaceful transition in Yemen
Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement today (25 January) on the conclusion of the National Dialogue in Yemen:
Today it has been possible to successfully conclude the National Dialogue under really difficult conditions and after some setbacks.
"Europe must not abandon France in these efforts."
Let us make proposals that are so good that others cannot refuse to embrace them!
That is the attitude we need.
And we intend to remain so in the future.
Together with German business we ought to seek ways to tap new markets at both a regional and a sectoral level.
Fifth: cultural relations and education policy.
Fortunately, we have a Minister who attaches a high priority to this subject.
And that is precisely the task of cultural relations and education policy.
Those are just a few points.
You will find in me a partner who is open to ideas, open to suggestions and open to criticism.
Anyone who knows me a little will be aware that I have always striven to maintain an open, discursive style of leadership.
As early as 17 December, immediately after assuming office, Foreign Minister Steinmeier had visited the French capital together with Federal Chancellor Angela Merkel.
For, as the German Foreign Minister stated, “As Foreign Ministers, Laurent Fabius and I have a special responsibility to nurture and develop Franco-German relations.”
Today the two Foreign Ministers will meet for intensive bilateral talks focusing on preparations for the Franco-German Council of Ministers which is scheduled for 19 February in Paris.
It is intended to mark the new beginning in Franco-German cooperation,  including specific joint projects.
With a view to the French engagement in Mali and the Central African Republic Foreign Minister Steinmeier stressed thatEuropeans and neighbours should be grateful for the French efforts to prevent further escalations.
that anything we talk about remains confidential!
I am assuming this office with great respect for the task ahead of me.
It is a great honour for me to have the privilege of speaking to you today.
This day is a day of mourning for the Jewish community in Thessaloniki.
Today we grieve for the 48,000 Holocaust victims from Thessaloniki – innocent men, women and children.
This place is a place of mourning for the Jewish community.
The injustice that was perpetrated here is unimaginable.
The Holocaust has changed the face of this city for ever, having left deep wounds and scars in its wake.
This loss pains all of us, Jews and non-Jews.
The suffering inflicted on your community by Germans and in the name of Germany is indescribable.
Modern Germany recognises its responsibility for the crimes committed against the Jewish and non-Jewish population in Greece.
This, the darkest chapter in the history of humanity, must never be forgotten.
For only by acknowledging our historical responsibility can we shape a better future together.
For all of us – Greeks and Germans, Jews and non-Jews – this future lies in a free, tolerant and globally minded Europe.
For this city was a unique melting pot of diverse cultures, religions and languages for many centuries.
We must remain watchful in future.
We must not look away when people suffer discrimination because of their religion, the colour of their skin or their sexual orientation.
Our future lies chiefly in the heads and hands of the younger generation.
Today I would like to assure you once again that the German Government will provide concrete support for your efforts to strengthen and develop Jewish life in Thessaloniki.
It would be wonderful if this could work.
We cannot undo the past.
All we can do is ask for forgiveness.
And we can help to ensure that the injustice that was perpetrated is never repeated.
In the coming years we want to continue to work together as partners and friends and shape the future together.
I am deeply moved, for I know where I am now standing, and the reason why I am here.
Here, following the invasion of the German Wehrmacht, all male Jews were herded together, tortured, humiliated and shortly afterwards deported for forced labour.
Gathering in this place of remembrance today is therefore all the more poignant for all of us.
which was a city with an undeniable Jewish identity for many centuries.
We are working to ensure that the memory of the atrocities and the National Socialist crimes is kept alive for both today’s and tomorrow’s generation.
Yet we also owe it to our children, who have inherited Germany’s history and who have to live with it.
Germany and German policymakers are working to make this a reality, and I, too believe in and am personally committed to this goal.
As visitors we can only imagine the energy and resources it has cost you yourself, the members of the community and your many supporters to rebuild and preserve Jewish life and Jewish institutions in this city.
We owe it to the victims not to balance out, compare or relativise their suffering, for it is immeasurable.
It’s nothing special, you might say –
nothing special for a democracy in which the changeover of high-level office-bearers is part of well-practised procedure.
This sort of trust is not something which can be taken for granted, even after many years of close cooperation.
First to you, Federal Foreign Minister, for the great trust which this appointment signifies.
To begin with, a threefold expression of thanks to you!
My second expression of thanks goes to you, Ms Haber and Mr Braun, for the collegial way in which we have been able to approach the transition phase.
You have advised me on what has to be done – and what I would be better not to do.
When I look at other ministries, that is not something that happens as a matter of course.
It is a manifestation of the solidarity and collegiality which is more evident in the Federal Foreign Office than anywhere else and which makes this place very special.
And I hope that by the end you won’t be saying,
I have first-hand memories of this building as the sinister stronghold of an economically and morally bankrupt regime.
Hardly anyone who stands up here on a day like this has had a childhood dream of doing so.
It’s nothing special in the Federal Foreign Office, which has more experience of job rotation than any other public authority in Germany.
It’s nothing special for us Germans, who – as a I read recently – count among our favourite poems Hermann Hesse’s “Steps”, which invokes the magic of new beginnings.
It is delightful that so many of you have responded to my invitation and come together today for the State Secretaries’ handover.
This only makes it all the more delightful that you have all come.
from day-to-day politics to administrative leadership, from German policy in Europe and the world to the security of our missions abroad, to issues of making work compatible with family life, to budgetary and financial questions.
So no, today is not such an everyday occurrence.
There is even a persistent rumour – which even circulates in these very halls, I hear! – claiming that a change of State Secretaries makes more of a difference than a change of Ministers.
I am sure you will understand that I cannot confirm that!
But the very fact that the rumour exists tells us something about the significance of these posts...
That certainly applies to the four we have before us today.
In bidding farewell to our most senior civil servants, we bid farewell to those people who have guaranteed the smooth running and the quality of all FFO work. They are the Minister’s first and most important advisers, across a vast array of subjects
Ms Haber, You were the Federal Foreign Office’s first female State Secretary and are now moving to a classic portfolio at the Interior Ministry – that alone has you going down in FFO history.
And I found you as all of our colleagues have found you: friendly, approachable, open to everybody.
You are leaving the FFO now, at least for a time.
The fact that you have been asked to be State Secretary at the Interior Ministry shows that your reputation and the high esteem in which your work is held reach far beyond the confines of these walls.
You may be proud of that, and the FFO can be proud of it too.
We wish you all the very best!
The FFO will not forget you – and we hope you will not forget us either!
And should the need arise, we will be turning to you with our questions about visa liberalisation...
Mr Braun, This is not the first time we two have met either.
One that I would like to raise here is that
You gained valuable experience there and knew how to bring it to bear long-term in your work at the FFO, in the Central Directorate-General and lately as the State Secretary responsible for organisation and economic issues – which has been a positive factor in the modernisation of the service and must continue to be felt!
We will keep it up!
As State Secretary, you worked with great dedication and finesse for the interests of the FFO and its staff.
You have achieved lasting successes there.
You are right in saying that
the FFO can only function effectively when it is properly equipped.
Mr Braun, You are leaving us for New York, a city you have known well since student days – where you will be Germany’s Permanent Representative to the United Nations.
I hardly need point out that this is one of the most important and difficult posts abroad that the Federal Republic of Germany has to assign.
I would like then to thank you, Mr Braun, for your time as State Secretary, and your wife for dealing with the inconveniences that life with a State Secretary brings.
I wish you both all the very best and every success in New York!
Mr Markus Ederer, You have had the longest journey to get here –
from Beijing, where you have been heading the EU delegation for the last two years.
I am glad that we can now carry on the collaboration that began in my first term in this office, when you lent me your support as head of the Policy Planning Staff.
We had a lot of fruitful debates back then, and you always used to urge me to keep an eye on the bigger picture, especially to look beyond the confines of Germany and Europe.
A number of other current dossiers will occupy your attention directly – the Syria conflict, Iran, the Middle East, Central Africa and not least the future of transatlantic relations.
the transatlantic partnership is indispensable.
The political elite of our generation find it easy to acknowledge that
For young people though, coming of age under the influence of conflicts and new, quite different perspectives, that no longer goes without saying.
More than anything, that is why you, why all of us together need to breathe new life into things and find new solutions and a new trust with the United States.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier’s speech at the Munich Security Conference.
At the beginning, in the 1960s and 1970s it was a very small circle of politicians, military officials and civilian security experts who met under the Chairmanship of the legendary Mr von Kleist.
The Munich Security Conference has tried to maintain a certain degree of exclusivity up to now – even if the circle of participants has gradually extended and expanded from year to year.
My main theory back then was that the European Union, the United States and Russia are indispensable strategic partners to one another.
Indispensable because they can only solve global problems together.
In my view this was as true for Iran as it was for the Middle East and Afghanistan and – top of the agenda at the time – for the resolution of the Kosovo question.
Up to now all of this seems to remain very current – unfortunately so, one feels inclined to say in light of still unresolved conflicts.
And one can effortlessly continue to list the crises awaiting solutions, as new flashpoints did not wait for old ones to die down before flaring up.
The developments in Egypt and the tragedy in Syria have further ramped up the degree of complexity and confusion in the international security situation – and have made the need to cooperate, including beyond the constraints of ideologies, more urgent than ever.
When, in March 2009, Hillary Clinton and Sergey Lavrov jointly pressed the reset button – attracting great media attention – they ushered in a new phase of productive cooperation which achieved lasting results.
Here everyone thinks above all of the significant progress in the field of disarmament and arms control.
Obama indeed deserved and still deserves credit for putting this topic back on the security policy agenda.
It is difficult to decipher the underlying causes of the creeping estrangement which has set in since the success of the “reset” during the second half of President Obama’s first term in office, which somewhat overshadowed the beginning of his second term and that has lately prompted murmurings of a new ice age, a new cold war.
The harshening of domestic policy in Russia has caused a certain degree of concern not only in the United States but also in Europe and Germany.
No one who has to deal with the Russia of today will be able to turn a blind eye to the political shortcomings or to fundamentally different ideas regarding the rule of law, democracy and civil liberties.
Russia visibly oscillates between modernising its economy and suffering setbacks in modernising politics and opening up the country.
It remains to be seen which path it will ultimately choose, as much in terms of strategy as of domestic policy.
There is, however, one certain and undeniable fact which applies to the foreseeable future:
we will continue to be reliant on cooperation with Russia.
A European security architecture geared to the long term is inconceivable without Russia.
My firm belief is that at the end of the day we must assert our interests in such a way as to open up room for manoeuvre and opportunities and which supports and bolsters the modernisation of Russian society.
There remains a fine line between accusations and refusal to engage in dialogue on the one hand and self-serving policies which abandon all principles on the other.
In any case mere outrage does not constitute foreign policy and is all too often ineffectual, sometimes it can even cause severe damage.
Those who want to live up to the responsibilities inherent to foreign and security policy will not be able to limit themselves to interacting with partners and like-minded players.
Dealing with difficult partners is inevitable.
We must be responsible and not let our principles fall by the wayside.
This is quite a challenge, and we will have to put a lot into it.
Thank you for giving your consent!
And to you, Mr Ederer, a very warm welcome!
Mr Steinlein – or may I say Stephan,
It should be no secret that we are not strangers to one another. On the contrary, the longest stretch of my political career has been spent in your company, ever since our paths first crossed at the Federal Chancellery.
Throughout those 14 years, we have discussed and thought through the widest range of different projects, in both foreign and home affairs. Some never saw the light of day; others became policy.
He quite literally rolled up his sleeves and joined us in formulating the first draft of the statutes for the Krzyżowa Foundation for Mutual Understanding in Europe.
but if he had, then he would surely have been referring to us when he wrote,
“Verus amicus est tamquam alter idem”.
But I had never met one who stood for active participation and real change.
At that moment I first had the thought of maybe embarking on a career as a diplomat myself.
But one year later by chance and coincidence I did in fact end up at the Federal Foreign Office.
This encounter has shaped my view of the role of a diplomat right up to the present.
Ukraine: remaining chances of political solution not yet exhausted
The protests against the Ukrainian Government grew across the country at the weekend.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier affirmed that the next few days could decide Ukraine’s future,
averring that the last remaining chances of a political solution had not yet been exhausted.
On Sunday, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier expressed his great concern at the televised images emerging from Ukraine:
The situation is not just tense; it is really serious.
The next few days could decide in what direction Ukraine is going to take its future. (...)
The Foreign Minister saw clear ways of starting that search, saying that
the new laws restricting freedom of the press and freedom of assembly needed to be withdrawn or at least fundamentally altered.
A good diplomat is not a stick-in-the-mud or a wet blanket.
That, in Steinmeier’s words, “will be an opportunity for Ukraine’s political leaders to demonstrate sincerity in their offers to the Opposition.”
he or she gets things moving when they are at a standstill!
I learned a lot about other offices and even more about politics.
But I never forgot where I came from and which ministry I have to thank for making me what I am.
Not because diplomats are anything special.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier has spoken to his Ukrainian counterpart Leonid Kozhara several times, urging him to stop the violence against peaceful demonstrators.
Minister Steinmeier has also spoken on the phone to Ukrainian Opposition leaders Arseniy Yatsenjuk and Vitali Klitschko, Polish Foreign Minister  Radosław Sikorski and Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov.
Click here for the full text of the Foreign Minister’s statement of 22 January 2014 on the situation in Ukraine.
The Ukrainian Ambassador Pavlo Klimkin was summoned to the Federal Foreign Office last Friday.
EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Füle and High Representative Catherine Ashton intend to travel to the Ukrainian capital this week for talks with the parties to the conflict.
The protests in Kyiv’s Independence Square, which have been going on for more than two months, escalated once again last week after President Yanukovych rushed through new laws restricting freedom of the press and freedom of assembly.
The demonstrations were originally triggered by President Yanukovych’s refusal to sign the free-trade agreement between Ukraine and the European Union because he wants to forge closer ties between his country and Russia.
But because this ministry boasts wonderful, intelligent people who see the bigger picture.
Click here for the full text of the Foreign Minister’s statement of 17 January 2014 on the Ukrainian legislation.
For me, you have always had a special place among these wonderful, intelligent people who can be found here.
I am glad that the two of us are standing here together at the front today.
On Monday, the Federal Foreign Office Spokesperson called on the political leaders in Kyiv to “get down to business” and follow up their pronouncements with action.
Click here for the full text of the Foreign Minister’s statement of 26 January 2014.
Talks at the highest level
We hit it off the very first time we met in Poland in the mid-1990s.
Direct talks were already being conducted at the highest level last week, with the German Government condemning the violence in Kyiv.
Federal Chancellor Angela Merkel called on President Yanukovych to engage in “serious dialogue” with the Opposition.
On the margins of the Syria peace conference in Montreux last week, Steinmeier stated that he could understand the Ukrainian Opposition’s sense of frustration when they had been feeling for days and weeks that the Government had not given any meaningful ground.
The Ukrainian parliament intends to debate what political line to take in a special session on Tuesday.
Published in the newsmagazine Focus (27 January 2014)
I myself was a keen observer for many years before I first came to Munich as a speaker and participant in 2006, as the then newly appointed Foreign Minister of the Federal Republic of Germany.
For all those who were and remain convinced that we are doomed to cooperate and that the crises and conflicts of today and tomorrow cannot be resolved with yesterday’s political labels and default perceptions – for all of these people, Barack Obama’s election victory in November 2008 was a sign of hope.
Indeed the stalemate in Russian-US relations came to an end unexpectedly quickly when the new President took office.
The restrictive, in part violent action taken against opposition movements in Russia, the laws limiting the ability of foreign non-governmental organisations to function, the irregularities, confirmed by independent observers, linked to the presidential elections of 2012, a series of judicial proceedings and verdicts which are dubious when judged by our standards of the rule of law, the discriminatory legislation against homosexuals which attracted a great deal of international criticism, the debate over the so-called Magnizki Act – all of this weighs heavily on Russian-US relations, as does the pointed granting of asylum to Edward Snowden following the request that he made in Moscow, whom the United States wants to prosecute for disclosure of official secrets.
The former superpower is clearly searching for its place in an evolving world order.
This cooperation serves our own security and is thus in Germany’s best interest, as well as that of the EU and the United States.
We need Russia to solve nearly all security policy crises and conflicts of our time, from the “frozen conflicts” on Europe’s periphery to the Middle East, to Iran as well as to Syria and Afghanistan.
Yet how can this irrefutable need for cooperation be combined with the maintenance of principles and policies which defend democracy, the social market economy, the application of international law as well as the recognition and implementation of universal human rights on an international level.
Those who do not wish to walk this fine line will ultimately have to answer the question of how policy makers can retain their ability to act.
That resulted in a deep professional and personal friendship.
Taxes, energy, pensions, health, research – there was hardly any sphere of politics with which I wasn’t confronted at some point in the Federal Chancellery or the SPD parliamentary group.
But here within these walls I had learned something which is just as important as specialist knowledge:
– how to escape from the ivory tower,
– the awareness that we are not alone in the world,
– that we are an inextricable thread in a long history spanning national borders.
And I learned something else here:
that freedom, prosperity and peace can never be taken for granted, but depend on many factors and have to be fought for time and time again.
This culture of cosmopolitanism, curiosity and creative ambition is our strength.
And as long as we make use of this strength, we do not have to worry about the future of our service.
but complacency is the direct route to ruin!
Ecclesia semper reformanda, in the words of Luther, and what applies to the church certainly applies to a ministry.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier opens a panel discussion at the Federal Foreign Office
The spring of 1914 saw Europe’s last months of peace before war. A war of which the causes and origins are still being researched by historians today.
The main focus of the discussion will be on the significance of the events of 1914 for diplomacy today.
The panel members are:
- Pascale Hugues (journalist)
- Prof. Herfried Münkler (Humboldt-Universität)
- Michael Thumann (DIE ZEIT newspaper)
- Prof. Andreas Wirsching (Institute of Contemporary History Munich)
The event is being chaired by Peter Lange, Deutschlandradio Kultur.
English interpretation will be provided.
Markus Meckel, former Foreign Minister and Chairman of the Board of Trustees of the Foundation for the Study of the SED Dictatorship, will give a speech introducing the exhibition.
Stephan, I look forward to continuing our collaboration, and I wish you all the very best and a sure hand in your work!
Cicero didn’t know us two – which I am quite glad about, even if I can’t get any more grey than I am –
Mr Steinlein knows what he’s talking about, on home affairs and on foreign policy, in the FFO and in Berlin’s political arena.
I have therefore asked him, as State Secretary, to take care of close liaison between the FFO and Government policy and to scrutinise the structures and resources of the FFO.
He will also be responsible for the major issues related to globalisation which increasingly occupy makers of foreign policy:
energy and the environment, climate change, scarcity of resources.
If we are to tackle these areas, we need to bring together information, strategic goals and the institutions we work with.
That is the thinking behind the decision to give Mr Steinlein responsibility for the Economic Affairs and UN Directorates-General.
What’s more, we need to make use not only of the whole toolbox of diplomacy but other channels too – especially cultural relations and education policy.
It also features more diversity with regard to lifestyles and career planning.
We must continue to work on these issues.
which makes petty jealousies and wrangling over territories unavoidable.
Fourth:
Cultural relations and education policy, therefore, will also be part of Mr Steinlein’s remit.
In all those endeavours, Stephan, Mr Steinlein, we wish you every success!
An emerging continent such as Africa harbours a whole new range of opportunities.
And you, Mrs Steinlein, Françoise, have my gratitude for once again letting me have your husband to work with. I take that as yet more proof of how productive and indispensable Franco-German cooperation really is!
Six years ago we were able to take the initiative with the PASCH concept and the focus on research and academic relations policy.
Let us build on that and first tackle the planned cuts in funding head on in the upcoming budget negotiations.
A country like Germany needs to have open windows and doors.
Ladies and gentlemen, The Federal Foreign Office can be proud to produce such individuals as Ms Haber, Mr Braun, Mr Ederer and Mr Steinlein.
But State Secretaries, even the best, are only one part of the whole!
self-confidence, active participation, curiosity, creativity.
What that means specifically for the individual units here in this ministry we will define more clearly together over the coming weeks, months and years.
I will do everything in my power to ensure that together, the top echelons and the staff, we pull in the same direction.
We will only be successful if we work together.
In this short address my aim was to clarify the position I would like to see us adopt and what a good Federal Foreign Office stands for –
I would therefore like to ask you to welcome the new State Secretaries with your usual openness and team spirit.
And let us put a stop to the complaints about how the status of the Federal Foreign Office is ostensibly declining!
We can take the lead by being a role model.
I was most surprised when after a four-year absence I came to the directors’ meeting and didn’t see a single female face apart from Ms Haber’s.
Here’s to good working relationships, to four good years for German foreign policy – I look forward to the road ahead!
At the same time we must recognise that new questions and challenges have arisen in the meantime, such as international cyber policy.
Loyalty has always been a valued quality in this building and I expect that to stay that way in the future.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier is giving the welcome speech on Thuesday, 28 January at a panel discussion open to the press in the Federal Foreign Office, which will look back on the start of the First World War a hundred years ago.
Renowned historians and journalists will hold a discussion under the heading “1914 – a Failure of Diplomacy”.
Afterwards, guests are invited to view the exhibition currently showing in the Atrium at the Federal Foreign Office – “Dictatorship and Democracy in the 20th Century”.
Further information:
Deutschlandradio will broadcast the welcome speech and panel discussion in full, on digital radio and as a livestream, under the title “Documents and Debates”.
Strengthening Jewish life in Thessaloniki
Minister of State Roth at the Holocaust Memorial for the Jews of Thessaloniki
Roth was the main speaker at an event to mark the International Day of Commemoration in memory of the victims of the Holocaust.
Speech by Foreign Minister Steinmeier at the State Secretaries’ handover ceremony in Berlin, 23 January 2014
***   Ladies and gentlemen of the office of State Secretary, Ms Haber, Mr and Mrs Braun, Mr Ederer, Ms Grzeski, Mr and Mrs Steinlein, Michael Roth, Colleagues, Ladies and gentlemen,
In so doing, you show that this is not such an everyday occurrence after all.
And in welcoming new State Secretaries, we welcome those people who will in future be the place where everything comes together, embodying vital bridges between the political leadership and rest of the staff.
The most senior civil servants in a Ministry whose whole staff are among the best and most dedicated in the country are already by definition premier league material, top class, the crème de la crème.
I myself enjoyed the benefit of your advice, Ms Haber, during your time as Director for South-Eastern Europe. You showed agility and far-reaching, detailed knowledge of the subject matter as well as keen political instinct and sure judgement, with admirable willingness to get things done and take decisions.
I would like to express my sincere thanks, both for the support you have lent the politicians at the top, and for the crutch and the example you have been to the whole of the FFO.
Your State Secretary résumé contains a lot of highlights too.
you were one of the first German diplomats to have worked in a key position in a large German company and to have felt how chilly it is when one no longer has the warm blanket of public service about one’s shoulders.
I have been following the development of section 05 of the budget in recent years and always found a lot to appreciate.
We and our work are going to be enriched by your perspective on Asia, on the configuration of powers in China and Japan and on their south-east Asian neighbours, as well as by the view from Beijing back to Europe and Germany.
We all will, including yourself, Ms Grzeski – as we yet again ‘steal’ your husband for a while.
Thanks to his unusual CV – he was the last Ambassador to Paris for the transitional GDR Government as a young man, only to start from scratch in the Bonn service the following year – as well as his wide-ranging interests, his ability to see divergent points of view and his experience at the FFO, Stephan Steinlein has become a valued sparring partner and adviser, an indispensable support.
I witnessed the great importance and the wonderful ways of those cultural relations a few days ago, when I visited the German school in Athens. I met young Greeks there who, in pursuing their educations and their own engagement with Germany and Europe, simply refused to be impressed by political fights and turf battles, instead becoming Ambassadors for Germany in Athens and Ambassadors from Athens to Germany, spurred by their own initiative and interest.
Without all of you, without your commitment, your ideas, your team spirit and your loyalty, it would be impossible to head the FFO.
In his speech Minister of State Roth emphasised that Jewish life in Thessaloniki had been almost completely eradicated in 1943.
He said that this loss was still painful today.
He assured the Jewish community that the Federal Government would assist them in their efforts to strengthen Jewish life in Thessaloniki once again.
Assistance for Greece
Minister of State Roth as the guest of the Jewish community in Thessaloniki
Both sets of talks focused on the situation of people affected by unemployment and possible prospects for young people in Greece.
Speaking in Thessaloniki, he issued the following statement:
Germany will continue to support and show solidarity with Greece along its difficult path.
Together we as Europeans must above all work to give young people a fresh perspective.
Projects which help young people to embark on careers in technical and business sectors show how this can succeed.
The fact that such initiatives are being sponsored here in Thessaloniki by the European Union is an important step forward.
Minister of State Roth has had a meeting in Berlin with his Portuguese counterpart Bruno Maçães.
I will do all I can to ensure that it remains so, and I hope we will be able to convince the Finance Minister as well.
Their talks focused on the future of Europe, their commitment to fundamental European values and the situation in Portugal.
Their talks focused on their shared commitment to Europe, its future and fundamental European values.
Secretary of State for European Affairs Maçães briefed Roth on the latest developments in Portugal.
Both voiced support also for intensified bilateral cooperation.
It was Minister of State Roth’s first meeting with Portugal’s Secretary of State for European Affairs Maçães.
A host of important issues were on the agenda.
Roth and Maçães focused particularly on issues relating to the future of the European Union.
Minister of State Michael Roth travelled to Greece on 25 and 26 January at the invitation of the Jewish community in Thessaloniki.
There he participated in a ceremony to mark the International Day of Commemoration in memory of the victims of the Holocaust.
Minister of State Michael Roth travelled to Greece for a two-day visit on 25 and 26 January at the invitation of the Jewish community in Thessaloniki.
Prior to this Roth held talks with representatives of the Jewish community and learned about their work to uphold the memory of the Holocaust and preserve Jewish life in Thessaloniki.
During Germany’s occupation of Greece (1941-1944) almost all of the around 50,000 Jews living in Thessaloniki at the time were deported to concentration camps.
Today the Jewish community has around 1200 members.
Click here for the full text of Minister of State Roth’s speech to mark International Holocaust Memorial Day in Thessaloniki on 26 January 2014.
In Thessaloniki Minister of State Roth also met Mayor Yiannis Boutaris and trainees from a project partly financed by EU funds designed to help young people gain professional qualifications.
In December, during his first visit to Athens after assuming office Roth had already stressed the German Government’s willingness to assist Greece in tackling its dramatically high levels of youth unemployment.
Europe must once again be regarded as part of the solution, and not part of the problem.
Both sides agreed it was crucial that Europe’s citizens should view the European Union not as part of the problem but as part of the solution.
So the fight against dramatically high youth unemployment in Portugal and across Europe had to remain right at the top of the EU’s agenda.
They emphasised the need to get this important message across to voters during the run-up to the European Parliament elections in May.
In this connection Roth commented:
The EU is a union founded on shared values.
So we need effective safeguards to protect our values – democracy, the rule of law, protection for minorities – wherever they are under threat.
We see a number of encouraging signs such as rising economic growth and employment at national as well as EU level.”
Roth and Maçães also announced their intention to intensify bilateral cooperation between Germany and Portugal.
Shared commitment to Europe
Minister of State Roth has met his Portuguese counterpart Maçães in Berlin.
Need to strengthen social cohesion in Europe
It was essential to strengthen social cohesion and also take steps to boost growth and employment, Roth and Maçães agreed.
Strengthening fundamental European values must be right at the top of the European agenda, they noted.
It can only confidently promote these values in the wider world if it consistently lives up to them at home.
Intensifying bilateral cooperation
Roth and Maçães keen to intensify bilateral cooperation
Roth and Maçães also discussed the current situation in Portugal.
The continuation of structural reforms and budget consolidation was contributing in a major way, they agreed, to strengthening the euro area as a whole.
Portugal has announced its intention of leaving the European financial assistance programmes in May.
“It’s been a difficult time both for our own country and for the European Union,” Maçães explained.
"But we’re now looking forward to a whole series of important events, including the European elections, for example.
In this connection they drew attention to the second German-Portuguese Forum due to take place on 10 and 11 March in Berlin.
Speech by Minister of State Michael Roth on the occasion of International Holocaust Remembrance Day in Thessaloniki
Minister, Ambassador, Governor, Lord Mayor, Mr Saltiel, People of the city of Thessaloniki,
Seventy–one years ago thousands of Jews were deported from this city to concentration camps, where, with just a few exceptions, they were brutally murdered.
Right up to the present day this memorial testifies to the deep pain of Thessaloniki’s Jewish citizens.
Yet this is a day and a place of mourning also for the non-Jewish population of Thessaloniki,
In 1943 the city not only lost numerous citizens. Its unique Jewish life - its culture, its academic heritage, its business - was almost completely eradicated.
Mr Saltiel,
I thank you for inviting me as a representative of the German Government.
Even though my generation is not personally culpable, we acknowledge our responsibility.
Indeed, the whole of Europe can learn from the history of Thessaloniki with all its ups and downs, successes and tragedies.
The way in which tolerance, mutual respect and peaceful co–existence were practised quite naturally on a day–to–day basis over long periods is a model for the future of our continent.
And we must not allow young people to drift into radicalism because they no longer feel they have any prospects for the future while our attention is distracted by the crisis.
And I am saying this quite deliberately here in Thessaloniki, the European Youth Capital 2014.
Under your leadership over many years the Jewish community in Thessaloniki has undertaken great efforts towards reconstruction and produced remarkable achievements under the most daunting circumstances.
We intend to stay in contact with you, Mr Saltiel, on this issue.
In this way, remembering the suffering of the past could engender a hope-filled German–Greek–Jewish partnership for the future.
I want to be a part of that.
Federal President Gauck to open 50th Munich Security Conference
The Munich Security Conference was established in 1963 under the name International Wehrkunde Encounter by Ewald Heinrich von Kleist-Schmenzin, a member of the resistance against the National Socialist regime.
In the early years, discussions focused on transatlantic relations and NATO.
On 31 January, Federal President Gauck will open the 50th Munich Security Conference with a speech on Germany’s role in the world.
Since the end of the Cold War, a broader range of issues have been debated at the Conference: current conflicts such as the one in Syria, cyber security, the European Security and Defence Policy as well as energy and climate security.
The Munich Security Conference is valued by many of its participants as a high-level multilateral forum with a culture of open discussion.
The Verkhovna Rada, the Ukrainian parliament, will convene tomorrow (Tuesday).
The United States and Canada are Germany’s closest allies outside Europe.
Large areas of common interests, shared challenges and values form a bond between the two sides of the Atlantic.
Philipp Mißfelder has held this post since January 2014.
As a member of the Altlantik-Brücke board of directors Philipp Mißfelder has been a committed transatlanticist for many years.
He firmly believes that good relations between Germany and the United States are in the interest of both countries.
The United States remains an important ally for Germany, and German policymakers should put all their efforts into strengthening this cooperation.
Yet that can only work, and I say this quite plainly, under one, crucial condition:
I know what it means to be following in the footsteps of people like Hans-Friedrich von Ploetz, Wolfgang Ischinger, Reinhard Silberberg, to name only those who have been and still are role models for me.
Federal Foreign Minister, Michael Roth, Markus Ederer, colleagues, I look forward to working with you!
Speech by State Secretary Stephan Steinlein on assuming office
Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs, Michael Roth, Ms Haber, Markus Ederer, Harald Braun, colleagues,
You have both provided me with guidance and practical support.
Indeed my first encounter with the Federal Foreign Office, which left an indelible impression on me, also occurred in the winter of 1989.
It was near the Wannsee lake, in the former West Berlin.
We had come together with a group of people from Poland, the United States, the Netherlands, East and West Germany to discuss rebuilding the dilapidated estate of Count von Moltke in Silesia as an international meeting place.
One of the group was a Head of Division from the Federal Foreign Office’s Cultural Directorate-General, Mr Weisel, Head of Division 614.
I now presume that the Federal Foreign Office had sent him as a watchdog to make sure that we amateurs dabbling in civil rights didn’t do anything too silly.
It was just an idea at that point, nothing more.
As head of Frank-Walter Steinmeier’s office I was involved with many things with which a normal diplomat does not usually come into contact.
In his first term of office, Federal Foreign Minister Steinmeier adopted external energy policy and climate diplomacy as one of his trademarks.
naturally, in an interconnected world overlap with other ministries is bound to increase,
I believe it is important that we do not fritter away our time with pointless bickering about who is responsible for what.
we have always regarded ourselves as a door-opener for business.
But we should be consistent in our endeavours.
We should be frontrunners in this area!
In view of their significance for German foreign policy, transatlantic relations need to be further extended and constantly nurtured.
It is therefore important to rebuild the relationship of trust that has been damaged by the disclosure of NSA activities.
He became the foreign policy spokesman of the CDU/CSU Parliamentary Group in the German Bundestag in 2009 and has been a member of the Bundestag Committee on Foreign Affairs since 2008.
Coordinator of Transatlantic Cooperation, Federal Foreign Office, 11013 Berlin
In his capacity as Coordinator of Transatlantic Cooperation Philipp Mißfelder has made the conclusion of the comprehensive free trade agreement between the EU and the US one of his goals.
Philipp Mißfelder has been actively involved in politics since his schooldays.
Foreign and security policy has always been especially important to him.
He believes that a trade agreement of this kind would be of great economic advantage to both sides and especially benefit people in Germany as well as Europe.
Another focus of his work will be maintaining and intensifying relations with American-Jewish organisations.
To this end, committed efforts on both sides are needed.
On the German side, the office has so far been held by former Minister of State Hildegard Hamm-Brücher, the former German Ambassador in Washington and former State Secretary Bernd von Staden, the Munich political scientist Professor Werner Weidenfeld, Karsten D. Voigt, former foreign policy spokesman of the SPD Parliamentary Group in the German Bundestag, and Hans-Ulrich Klose, former Member of the German Bundestag.
The Coordinator of Transatlantic Cooperation can be reached at the Federal Foreign Office as follows:
Postal address:
1914 – a fateful year
panel discussion at the Federal Foreign Office
The spring of 1914 saw Europe’s last months of peace before war. A war, the causes and origins of which historians are still grappling with today.
Can we rule out something similar happening today?
Foreign Minister Steinmeier opens the event
These and many more questions were the focus of yesterday evening’s event at the Federal Foreign Office.
And what is the significance of the events of 1914 for diplomacy today?
Only a few months later a diplomatic crisis, accompanied by nationalist zeal and the flexing of military muscle, flared into a conflagration.
what we are seeing is a picture of failure – of the military and political elites, but also of diplomacy.
Their task should in fact have been to calm the feverish excitement in the world of politics,
to quell the recklessness, to dispel the mutual distrust.
Key to understanding this century
Bundestag approves Bundeswehr deployment in Turkey and the Mediterranean
Guests in the Europasaal at the Federal Foreign Office
What happened in 1914 was the key to understanding that century.
But we must not only look back –
Europe as we know it today had grown out of the experiences of the First and Second World War, the Minister went on.
Today, it is no longer the law of the strong which prevails, but the strength of the law.
Cooperation has supplanted old rivalries.
We now had to pass on the right lessons drawn from these experiences and ensure they are heeded in the future.
The German Bundestag voted in favour of continued Bundeswehr participation in the NATO operations in Turkey and the Mediterranean.
This did not only mean overcoming the crisis in Europe.
Externer Link, öffnet in neuem FensterRead the full version of Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s welcome speech here.
Bring new life to the idea of Europe
Münkler, Thumann, Hugues, Wirsching and Lange (from left to right)
The discussion was chaired by Peter Lange from Deutschlandradio Kultur.
The panellists did not only discuss the fact that diplomacy had been to a certain degree overwhelmed and that the military mindset had seen no alternatives (Wirsching), but they also addressed the implications of the war for society.
At the time, masculinity was strongly defined by serving in the military, according to Münkler this led to great social pressure to take part in the war.
Herfied Münkler stressed Germany’s particularly important geopolitical position.
Germany itself bore a particular responsibility for the political situation due to its geopolitical position, Münkler insisted.
It quite literally stood in the middle of the conflict and merged various conflicts rather than tackling them individually.
Today we have much better instruments for conflict resolution, stated Wirsching.
"Europe even works so well that is has become boring", offered Hugues.
Nonetheless the anniversary in 2014 could help to revitalise the concept of Europe as a force for peace in the world.
The debates over the First World War and its consequences did not finish with the panel discussion.
Markus Meckel, former Foreign Minister and Chairman of the Board of Trustees of the Foundation for the Study of the SED Dictatorship, invited
the guests to accompany him to the Atrium of the Federal Foreign Office.
Dictatorship and democracy in the age of extremes – exhibition in the Atrium of the Federal Foreign Office.
Advocating an active foreign policy
In his speech in the German Bundestag, Foreign Minister Steinmeier advocated an active German foreign policy.
Active Fence:
Seven members abstained.
The deployment of this defence system on NATO’s south-eastern borders was designed to protect Turkey’s people and territory.
Responsibility towards Turkey as a partner
Foreign Minister Steinmeier also commented on the centenary of the outbreak of the First World War.
Six members abstained.
However, this required parliamentary approval from the Bundestag.
In his speech to the Members of the German Bundestag, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier clearly advocated an active German foreign policy.
A responsible foreign policy
He went on to say that foreign policy required stamina and was not intended to keep pace with news on the internet.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier considers the NATO mission to be a “platform for cooperation with the southern Mediterranean countries”.
Steinmeier continued:
If an influential country does not take part in seeking solutions to international conflicts, they will not be resolved.
To illustrate his point, he referred to Germany’s contribution to the destruction of Syria’s chemical weapons.
Minister of State Böhmer meets UNESCO Director-General Bokova
A ray of hope for Ukraine
Minister of State Böhmer and UNESCO Director-General Bokova
At the end of his speech, the Foreign Minister addressed the situation in Ukraine.
On 28 January, a panel discussion in the Federal Foreign Office debated the significance of the events of 1914 for diplomacy today.
Was it inevitable for the July crisis to lead to catastrophe back then?
By its end, the First World War had claimed 17 million lives.
Even 100 years later, the events of that year remained a hot topic, continued the Foreign Minister.
The event is taking place in Berlin at the invitation of the Federal Government.
Following this the French journalist Pascale Hugues, political scientist Herfried Münkler, historian Andreas Wirsching and journalist Michael Thumann from the weekly DIE ZEIT discussed the meaning of the events of 1914.
According to Hugues, documents from the time, for example letters from the front and diaries, reveal a "nationalist furore" which seems strange to us today.
Thumann spoke of the ramifications of the First World War outside Europe – in Turkey for example, the Treaty of Lausanne laid the foundations for statehood.
Exhibition “Dictatorship and democracy in the 20th century”
An exhibition entitled "Dictatorship and democracy in the 20th century" is currently showing there, in which the guests were able to view numerous documents from the time, some of which came from the Political Archive of the Federal Foreign Office.
"1914 – of the failure of and need for diplomacy" – guest article by Foreign Minister Steinmeier published in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung on 25 January 2014
At a working breakfast, Böhmer underlined the importance of UNESCO as the international community’s think tank.
Minister of State Böhmer underlined the importance of UNESCO as a think tank for the international community.
to inject new momentum
In this age of globalisation, she went on, promoting education and science throughout the world was becoming ever more crucial.
The day before, Mykola Azarov resigned from his post as Prime Minister, and the Ukrainian parliament withdrew a series of anti-democratic laws.
He also called on the Opposition to leave Kyiv’s Independence Square.
We do not yet know if he is only playing for time.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier opened the event with a reference to the novel "1913" by Florian Illies, which described the atmosphere of imminent change brewing amongst German artists and intellectuals in the "fateful year 1913" – a kind of feverish excitement was simmering throughout society but people did not suspect what was yet to come.
The dismantling of Europe had to be prevented and the continent taken forward. There was still a lot that diplomacy and foreign policy needed to do to achieve this.
It was important, he said, that military restraint was not seen as a general shying away from responsibility.
In light of the millions of people who are victims of conflict or civil wars today (...), in light of the millions of people who might be forced to flee their countries because of these conflicts, [I believe that] what has often been written in recent years (...) about the declining status (...) or even the insignificance of foreign policy is not only insupportable but also quite cynical.
He believed that this was a confirmation of the idea of keeping on negotiating so no shots will be fired and stressed that
He also stated that, as the strongest economy and the most populous state in Europe, Germany could not keep out of foreign policy.
Pursuing a policy of military restraint is the right way; but it must not be mistaken for a general shying away from responsibility.
Germany has become slightly too big and has too much influence in Europe to adopt this kind of strategy (...):
He stated that this had made clear the role Germany should play.
Commenting on this, Foreign Minister Steinmeier stated as follows:
So far, the Opposition has not been able to rely on the offers made by the Ukrainian President.
She arrived in Kyiv yesterday and is seeking to mediate between the two sides.
He said that 1914 was proof of a “failure of diplomacy”, a “lack of foreign policy” and an increased “estrangement and speechlessness” between states.
In his policy statement on foreign, European and human rights policy Steinmeier stressed that “the policy of military restraint must not be mistaken for a general shying away from responsibility”.
this was why he was a strong proponent of “the value of foreign policy, an active foreign policy”.
Although Foreign Minister Steinmeier considered this a “ray of hope” that could open up the path towards finding a political solution, President Viktor Yanukovych yesterday attached new conditions to signing the Ukrainian parliament’s decisions into law.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier emphasised that Germany would put “all its efforts” into supporting the EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs, Catherine Ashton.
Steinmeier closed his speech by saying that he wished Ashton much “luck and success” in tackling this task.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier had tabled the motions on the two mandates.
In a roll call vote on 29 January, the German Bundestag voted in favour of continued Bundeswehr participation in the NATO operations in Turkey and the Mediterranean.
On Wednesday the German Bundestag approved continued Bundeswehr participation in NATO’s Operations Active Fence and Active Endeavour (OAE) by a large majority.
The parliamentarians had previously debated the motions in their second and third readings.
On 16 January Foreign Minister Steinmeier had tabled the German Government’s motions in Parliament.
Speaking in the German Bundestag, he called for the extension of the Bundeswehr mission under the NATO mandate for Operation Active Fence in Turkey.
On 29 January the members of the German Bundestag approved, with 523 votes in favour and 71 votes against, the extension of Germany’s participation in the Patriot mission under NATO.
The Bundeswehr will contribute up to 400 servicemen and women to the operation in Turkey for another year.
In his statement to the German Bundestag on 16 January, Foreign Minister Steinmeier made it plain that the operation is also a manifestation of our responsibility towards our NATO partner Turkey.
well over 700,000 refugees have fled to Turkey, putting a massive strain on its humanitarian capabilities.
Moreover, on 29 January the members of the Bundestag approved, with 467 votes in favour and 129 votes against, the continued Bundeswehr participation in NATO’s OAE in the Mediterranean.
The threat of maritime terrorism is however currently considered to be only an abstract one.
In addition, the operation has morphed into a reconnaissance and observation mission.
The German Government thus favours a continuation of the operation “under altered circumstances”, as Foreign Minister Steinmeier emphasised in his speech on 16 January.
In future, no more than 500 servicemen and women should be deployed.
For more information on the mandates see the Government website.
Statement by Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier at the first reading of the motion to extend the mandate for continued German involvement in Operation Active Endeavour (OAE) in the German Bundestag on 16 January 2014
Text panel discussion film
1914 – a failure of diplomacy
How did diplomacy fail in 1914?
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier emphasised the need to have this debate in his welcome speech:
But it was no natural catastrophe, stressed Steinmeier.
That is why it was so important to appreciate and promote European integration today.
This is exactly what the historians and media representatives on the panel went on to discuss.
They analysed the consequences of the war ... including for diplomacy today.
The evening was concluded by Markus Meckel, the first democratically elected Foreign Minister of the GDR.
On 28 January 2014 a discussion was held in the Federal Foreign Office on the outbreak of the First World War and its consequences – including for European diplomacy.
Why could peace in Europe not be safeguarded 100 years ago?
These questions and the memory of the outbreak of the First World War comprised the topics on 28 January in the Federal Foreign Office.
“analysing and assessing the events of 1914 effectively holds the key to understanding the history of the past 100 years, up to the present day.”
The American historian and diplomat George Kennan had described the World War as the “seminal catastrophe” of the 20th century.
“This much is sure, the seminal catastrophe of the 20th century was a man-made catastrophe.”
According to Steinmeier, a war in Europe was unimaginable today; however:
“We, who take all of this for granted, should take a moment every now and again to remember that the European project represents progress for civilisation, that the founders’ express aim was to prevent another “1914” from occurring and to learn from the mistakes of the past.”
He invited the guests to the exhibition, entitled “Dictatorship and Democracy in the 20th Century”.
It is currently showing in the Atrium of the Federal Foreign Office – there is no admission fee and it is open to the public,
weekdays from 10 a.m. to 7 p.m. until 28 February 2014.
Minister of State Maria Böhmer met UNESCO Director-General Irina Bokova for a working breakfast today. Bokova is currently staying in Berlin to take part in the inaugural meeting of the UN Secretary General’s Scientific Advisory Board.
Minister of State Maria Böhmer met UNESCO Director-General Irina Bokova today.
“Global access to knowledge” had to play a key role in the formulation of objectives for sustainable development, something the United Nations is currently working on.
This is an important evening, and it comes at the right time.
Together, they attended the inaugural meeting of UNESCO’s Scientific Advisory Board.
Together, they attended the inaugural meeting of the Scientific Advisory Board, an advisory body belonging to UNESCO.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier called the United Nations indispensable in solving ongoing conflicts.
As, during this trip to Berlin, Ban is inaugurating the Scientific Advisory Board thus providing the UN with an advisory body for the field of science.
Yet the Scientific Advisory Board was not the only important topic discussed by Steinmeier and Ban.
It goes without saying that large institutions with such a long history also need to be reformed.
But above all it must be recognised that the United Nations is indispensable.
it is proof that no one other than the United Nations and its Secretary-General was in a position to bring two conflicting parties, who have been involved in a civil war for three years in which great cruelty has been inflicted, together in one room.
Joint press conference at the Federal Foreign Office
Germany was a strong partner to the United Nations.
Establishment of the Scientific Advisory Board
Afterwards, together with UNESCO Director-General Irina Bokova, Ban and Steinmeier opened the inaugural meeting of the Scientific Advisory Board.
Together, they will deal with topics such as climate change, energy and biodiversity and transmit their knowledge to the UN.
The members of the Scientific Advisory Board
And in fact Goethe said it himself:
Knowing is not enough; we must apply.
Willing is not enough; we must do.
The work of UNESCO
Steinmeier emphasised that he was pleased and proud that this body was convening for the first time here in Berlin and he considered it to be a sign of recognition for Germany’s work in the UN over the last four decades.
That is a tremendous achievement and, Secretary-General, I am personally very grateful to you for this.
The Scientific Advisory Board should now serve as a bridge between knowledge and action for the United Nations.
Today’s award ceremony is taking place in a festive setting.
That’s good, we can well use it.
For more than a century, the American Chamber of Commerce in Germany has been one of the key institutions and one of the reliable fixtures of our close bilateral relations.
This year, it is conferring its Transatlantic Partnership Award on two cultural beacons from our countries.
The New York Philharmonic Orchestra on the one hand and the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra on the other have their own very special place at the heart of their cultures.
And the fact that the Transatlantic Partnership Award is going to these two institutions says more about the transatlantic partnership than any long speech could do.
Bilateral topics also featured in the talks.
Key topic – Syria
Frank-Walter Steinmeier and the Foreign Minister of the United Arab Emirates, Sheikh Abdullah bin Zayed Al Nahyan
For it says no more and no less than that the transatlantic partnership, indeed the friendship between our two countries, is not a matter for marginal groups or minorities. Rather, it lies at the heart of our cultures.
If we know that then we can also endure and even overcome the tensions which have surfaced recently.
Our countries have proven repeatedly that they are able to learn from their mistakes.
If one side cannot understand what the other is saying or doing in any given circumstances, we know thanks to trust which has grown over so many years that we will continue our dialogue and that we will find our way back to one another.
Ties between our civil societies help here.
Every year, five million people from Germany travel to the United States.
They go as business people, tourists, relatives and friends.
Young Americans regard Berlin as one of the “coolest” cities in Europe.
For example, the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership we are seeking to conclude can boost prosperity on both sides of the Atlantic.
We have every reason to cultivate and expand our friendship and to grasp the opportunities of the future together.
I’m quite certain that in all of this we will recognise that what we have in common is far greater.
The values we both cherish, preserve and defend are far greater.
Close bilateral cooperation – including in helping third parties
Steinmeier underlined the exceptionally good and still growing economic relations between the two countries.
He expressed his support for the Expo 2020 set to take place in Dubai.
Steinmeier noted the current cooperation on the establishment of a trust fund for the reconstruction of Syria.
What applies to the two orchestras honoured today and the high regard in which they are held, also applies to many other cultural spheres:
By honouring two of the most famous orchestras, and by showing our esteem for the transatlantic partnership in this happy and festive setting, we have demonstrated yet again the strong ties we share thanks to our cultures.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s discussion with the Foreign Minister of the United Arab Emirates focused above all on joint efforts regarding Syria.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier’s discussion with the Foreign Minister of the United Arab Emirates, Sheikh Abdullah bin Zayed Al Nahyan, mainly focused on the jointly established Syria Recovery Trust Fund and the prospects of the Syria peace conference.
They also had experience in working together to help third parties, he continued.
UN Secretary-General Ban met Foreign Minister Steinmeier today.
During his visit to Berlin, Ban Ki‑moon met Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier today.
In a joint press conference Ban praised the contribution that Germany makes to the United Nations (UN).
UN Secretary-General Ban and Foreign Minister Steinmeier
This is the fifth time that Ban Ki‑moon has been to Germany, but this visit is a special one –
Foreign Minister Steinmeier referred to this right at the start of the press conference with the UN Secretary-General at the Federal Foreign Office.
the United Nations is indispensable
The evening before, over dinner, they had a long conversation on criticism voiced on the United Nations, according to the Foreign Minister.
Anyone who does not believe this need only look at the conference on Syria –
Steinmeier went on to say that he was pleased that during the course of his visit, Ban would also visit the Bonn Campus where numerous UN organisations are based.
In German, Ban Ki‑moon thanked the Foreign Minister for his hospitality.
The UN Secretary-General praised above all the important role played by Germany in the peaceful settlement of disputes as well as in the fields of disarmament and human rights.
The Board is comprised of 26 scientists, who do not only come from very diverse regions of the world, but also different scientific disciplines.
In the fully‑packed Weltsaal at the Federal Foreign Office the scientists were introduced to the audience by the moderator Ranga Yogeshwar and they offered a brief glimpse into the objectives of the scientific board.
In her address, UNESCO Director-General Bokova stressed that she could think of no better place than Berlin to set up such a board – Germany continued to be the country of poets and thinkers.
Full version of Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s speech at the inauguration of the United Nations’ Scientific Advisory Board (30 January 2014)
Above all, he highlighted projects in Afghanistan, such as joint engagement to restore the Gardens of Babur in Kabul or the civilian airport near Mazar-e-Sharif.
Sheikh Abdullah spoke of the "strategic value" of his country’s relationship with Germany.
In addition, he referred to the strong growth of economic relations as well as to the more than 10,000 Germans living in the United Arab Emirates.
The Syria Trust Fund
The Framework Agreement for the Syria Trust Fund was signed by Germany, the United Arab Emirates, the Syrian National Coalition and KfW (Reconstruction Loan Corporation) on 2 September 2013 at the Federal Foreign Office.
The Syria Trust Fund works as follows:
As a community funding mechanism of the Friends of Syria group members states, the Syria Recovery Trust Fund provides civilian support to the National Coalition.
Joint action to alleviate the suffering in Syria
Steinmeier welcomed Sheikh Abdullah as a "long-standing colleague" and "great associate" who he had already been able to work with for many years, and referred to the recent close contact between both Foreign Ministers in relation to the issue of Syria.
The situation in Syria was still a top priority, stated Steinmeier in the joint press conference held by both Foreign Ministers after their talks.
He and Sheikh Abdullah were far from satisfied with how the peace conference in Montreux was unfolding, he added.
Nonetheless, in light of the unimaginable degree of cruelty that the people in Syria had been forced to endure over three years of civil war, Steinmeier considered it to be a step forward that the parties were at the negotiating table at all.
The possibility of these negotiations leading to a political solution however, was still a long way off, he stated.
The countries also had mutual interests in the field of renewable energies, stressed Steinmeier, and he referred to the pilot projects developed in the United Arab Emirates which could serve as examples to encourage further initiatives.
With their contributions to this Fund, Germany and the United Arab Emirates had laid the foundations and set an example for how other countries could collaborate.
Under the current circumstances the fund’s priority is to provide for basic needs (above all water, energy, medical care and a secure supply of food). However, when the armed conflict comes to an end the fund should also ensure the immediate availability of resources for reconstruction work (above all for civilian infrastructure).
Both Germany and the United Arab Emirates made initial contributions of 10 million euros to the fund.
The donor states’ contributions are paid into the fund, which is managed by KfW, and will be used for measures aiming to alleviate the immediate suffering of the population in opposition‑held areas who have been affected by the civil war.
On 30 January, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier met Ronald Lauder, President of the World Jewish Congress, at the Federal Foreign Office.
One of the issues discussed was how to deal with artefacts looted during the National Socialist era.
President of the World Jewish Congress visits the Federal Foreign Office
Federal President Joachim Gauck at the presentation of the Transatlantic Partnership Award of the American Chamber of Commerce in Germany to the Berlin and New York Philharmonic Orchestras in Berlin on 28 January 2014
The transatlantic partnership, the partnership between the United States of America and the Federal Republic of Germany, needs revitalising impetus. What’s more, its identity has to be reasserted and it requires strengthening.
I believe that has profound symbolic significance.
I’m confident that we can do that again in the current climate.
Sometimes we talk of a “culture of trust”: one of the best ways to foster mutual understanding is to engage more intensively with each other’s culture.
And they all mirror the close and long-standing relations which link our nations.
If we engage more intensively with each other’s culture, we will see much which we regard as familiar and plausible, as well as things which seem peculiar and even a bit alien to us. But we can take pleasure in that, too.
Our understanding for each other is far greater, as are our shared world-views.
It’s especially important that some aspect about the other side fascinates us or kindles our enthusiasm.
And the Chamber of Commerce has scored a bull’s-eye with its choice of awardees this year.
we value, indeed we admire, each other’s great cultural feats.
If such festive occasions are possible and successful, then we will also manage to master day-to-day life with its tasks and challenges in such a way that our partnership and our friendship can grow and flourish.
I wish him all success in this endeavour.
The new Tunisian government was sworn in a few days ago following the adoption of a new constitution at the weekend.
Tunisia Country Profile
The massive loss of confidence in the EU is grist to the mill of eurosceptic and right-wing populist parties, which are on the rise all over our continent.
For as the great European Václav Havel said:
“Hope is not the conviction that something will turn out well but the certainty that something makes sense, regardless of how it turns out.”
Foreign Minister Steinmeier phones new Tunisian Prime Minister Jomaâ
After speaking on the phone to Mehdi Jomaâ, Tunisia’s new Prime Minister, Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement:
I congratulate Tunisia’s new Prime Minister, Mehdi Jomaâ.
If Tunisia’s political leaders continue to be guided by the spirit of give-and-take and responsibility towards the nation, I have every confidence in a bright future for the country.
We will stand by our Tunisian partners at this important time in the run-up to the elections.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier spoke yesterday evening on the phone to Prime Minister Jomaâ.
The new constitution has been hailed all over the world as a milestone for reform in Tunisia.
The task of the new government now is to take the agreed transition plan forward and organise parliamentary and presidential elections.
Tunisia’s so-called Jasmine Revolution in 2010/2011 sparked a wave of movements for change across the Arab world.
Welcome at Berlin Tegel airport
In the morning he was welcomed at Tegel airport by Foreign Minister Steinmeier.
He and his new government bear a great responsibility for taking forward Tunisia’s ambitious reform and modernisation agenda.
However, he went on to say,
In the area of economic cooperation Kerry highlighted the work on a transatlantic free trade agreement between the EU and the United States as a central issue.
He added that they would continue to work on safeguarding the data protection interests of all citizens in the relevant bodies.
He said that in the past the close economic relations between the United States and Germany had “meant more jobs, investment and growth” on both sides of the Atlantic.
Joining forces to tackle international crises
With regard to current crises and the start of the Munich Security Conference today (Friday, 31 January), Federal Foreign Minister Steinmeier spotlighted Kerry’s strong commitment to working for a peaceful solution in the Middle East.
This step amounted to the parties, who have been at war for three years, “at least sitting down at a negotiating table”.
Germany is involved in the destruction of the residuals of Syrian chemical weapons, which are initially to be destroyed on an American ship.
The two ministers also discussed the future of the Iranian nuclear programme.
Steinmeier summed up the situation: “An initial step has now been taken which encourages us to test whether Iran keeps its promises in the coming months.
Then we can try and take another step.”
Ukraine also an issue at the Munich Security Conference
The protests in Kyiv continue.
Ukraine was also a discussion point in Berlin, as it will be in Munich.
Kerry stressed United States President Obama’s “full support” for the Ukrainian opposition.
Representatives of the opposition and the government are expected to attend the Munich Security Conference.
Steinmeier said that during the talks in Munich they intended to work with the other foreign ministers to do their part to ensure “that this country, Ukraine, has a free and democratic future”.
Kerry added that this was about “the freedom of choice for the people of Ukraine and their ability to be able to define their future”.
Secretary of State Kerry went to the Federal Chancellery at midday for talks with Chancellor Merkel before also travelling on to Munich.
More than 20 years after it was established in 1991, the Visegrad Group can look back on an impressive success story:
the integration of Hungary, Poland, Slovakia and the Czech Republic into the European Union and NATO did much to foster peace, prosperity, stability and security in Europe.
The Visegrad Group’s joint accession to the EU on 1 May 2004 was an important stepping stone towards European integration.
The Federal Foreign Office in Bonn is also responsible for issues relating to the status of the organisations and any protocol matters that are to be handled in the Bonn region.
In the evening the two ministers met again at the Munich Security Conference.
The two ministers first discussed current foreign policy challenges and bilateral issues in private.
They then took part in a more public exchange of views and a joint press conference.
A friendship that has grown
“This kind of debate and conflicting views must not be allowed to destroy a friendship that has grown.”
Secretary of State Kerry underlined their joint efforts to tackle terrorist threats and emphasised that both countries were going through a process of close consultation and exchange.
Steinmeier not only expressed the hope that they would finally succeed in making a breakthrough, but also reiterated the promise of German support for the talks with the Israeli and Palestinian sides.
Steinmeier went on to say that a solution had to be found for “the great suffering in Syria, death, displacement and flight”.
He said that during the peace conference in Geneva, a “small step” to prepare a political solution to the civil war in Syria had been attempted.
The efforts and adjustments made by politicians and the business community, and most especially by ordinary citizens, on the way to the EU were huge; that can’t be stressed often enough.
But we all know that it’s easier to travel along a difficult road together.
Ultimately, it not only helps the states concerned but also the EU as a whole when a group of member states resolutely pull in the same direction and present joint positions.
In an EU which is ever larger and ever more heterogeneous, cooperation among groups of member states doesn’t only make sense but is also desirable.
In Europe, a variety of regional formats have proved their worth – for example, the Franco-German Council of Ministers, the Weimar Triangle, the Nordics and, of course, the Visegrad Group.
The Hungarian Presidency of the Visegrad Group [from 1 July 2014: Slovakia] coincides with several memorable anniversaries this year:
These were important milestones, not only for Germany but also for the Visegrad states.
Our countries are linked by our shared European history.
We in Germany will never forget how much our country owes to the Visegrad states.
Let me name just some historical turning points:
Foreign Minister Steinmeier speaks to the Turkish newspaper Hürriyet about the status of German-Turkish relations.
All of this shows that it was not least Hungary, Poland, Slovakia and the Czech Republic which – with great courage and farsightedness – paved the way for German unity and a Europe without internal borders: a truly historic achievement.
What are your priorities for relations between Germany and Turkey?
Turkey is an important and indispensable partner to Germany.
Alongside the human side of our bilateral relations, one need only to look at a map to see Turkey’s international significance given its very exposed geostrategic location in a region which is anything other than stable.
This is why we want to actively engage in and further develop the strategic dialogue between Germany and Turkey.
On 31 January Foreign Minister Steinmeier met his US counterpart John Kerry for talks in Berlin.
US Secretary of State Kerry visits Berlin
US Secretary of State Kerry travelled to the German capital today for a brief visit.
Steinmeier, who broached the controversial subject of the National Security Agency’s surveillance activities with his US counterpart, stressed that the German-American friendship rested on a “firm foundation”.
US Secretary of State Kerry in Berlin (31 January 2014)
Joint press conference with Kerry (l.) and Steinmeier
After his meeting with US Secretary of State Kerry, Foreign Minister Steinmeier travelled on to Munich for the Security Conference.
Any assessment of the first ten years of the Visegrad states’ EU membership has to be positive.
Moreover, the Federal Foreign Office in Bonn serves as the point of contact for a host of other institutions which perform environmental and development tasks and are concerned with disaster reduction and respect for human rights around the world.
Together we’ve already achieved much in Europe – and we want to continue along this path hand in hand.
The EU must never become solely the concern of the large member states. For if we in Europe really want to complete any major projects then, first and foremost, we need the support of the medium-sized and small countries.
The Visegrad states are therefore more important than ever to Germany as European partners.
Yet, even if our focus has been largely on stabilising the eurozone and promoting growth and employment recently, we must never forget that
Europe is much more than a single market and a monetary union. Above all, Europe is a unique community of shared values.
However, it has been evident time and again recently how shaky the foundations of the frequently invoked union of shared values have become.
My trip to Thessaloniki last weekend and the remembrance ceremony in the Bundestag on Monday, when we remembered the victims of National Socialism, have left a lasting impression on me.
Remembering the Holocaust, the expulsion and murder of Jewish citizens, is a perpetual task for us Germans.
Democracy, the rule of law, pluralism, cultural and religious diversity, social inclusion and the protection of minorities are all fundamental values which we have to fully respect ourselves in order to be credible when asking others to do so.
And when fundamental democratic and rule-of-law principles are jeopardised in a member state, we need effective instruments and mechanisms at European level which enable us to resolutely protect our community of shared values.
Of course, this new mechanism to protect our fundamental values must be based on objective criteria and apply in equal measure to all member states – regardless of whether they are big or small, founding members or newly acceded countries.
Twenty-five years ago, your countries showed the rest of Europe how to tear down walls, thus paving the way for freedom, democracy and human rights.
These will be the first European elections since the crisis broke out.
This crisis has many different faces: debt crisis, financial market crisis, economic crisis, social crisis, the crisis in fundamental values.
Many citizens no longer see Europe as part of the solution but, rather, as part of the problem.
Making Europe’s added value evident to people remains a major challenge and task for us all.
Citizens have to finally regard the EU once more as an organisation which is there to solve problems, not to aggravate them. We must finally prove to people who have lost faith in Europe’s strength due to the crisis that
Turkey is a large country where a great deal has been set in motion in recent years.
How do you view the Turkish Government’s approach to the accession negotiations, particularly in the context of the latest developments in Turkey?
Turkish society has changed and developed.
The calls for more participation as well as for more openness emanating from the heart of Turkish society show that the reform efforts undertaken by the Erdoğan Government during the accession process have taken root.
Let me conclude by commenting on the very apt programme of music:
A self-confident Government can be composed and open to dialogue in the face of peaceful challenges and protests.
Allegations of corruption have now been put on the table.
This offers the chance for the modern Turkish rule of law to prove itself.
It’s fitting to celebrate the Visegrad countries and Europe with a concert, for your countries made it possible for a new melody to be played in Europe.
A civil war is raging in Syria.
This has placed a great deal of strain on Turkey and the country feels abandoned.
And the following pieces are truly European, for the composers and their works, each of which have their roots in a different European country, have become artists and works of art which belong to Europe as a whole.
How could the EU support Turkey?
How do you view Turkey’s policy on resolving the situation in Syria?
The bloody conflict in Syria is spilling over into the whole neighbourhood.
People in the area of Turkey which borders Syria live in constant fear.
They demonstrate Europe’s diversity and beauty in a very special way.
Let’s enjoy this European music together.
Germany stands shoulder to shoulder with its NATO partner Turkey in dealing with this situation –
The humanitarian situation is exerting a huge amount of pressure on Turkey.
Turkey and its people have demonstrated very generous sympathy and willingness to help the people in Syria by having already taken in hundreds of thousands of Syrian refugees.
Germany is actively helping to provide for the refugees through German non-governmental organisations as well as via our contributions to the UN refugee agency.
We are giving direct aid to the areas bordering Syria in an attempt to improve the provision of supplies there and thus to alleviate the burden weighing on Turkey.
On a political level we are coordinating closely with the Turkish Government.
Deciding on how to continue dealing with the Syria crisis will also be an important feature of our discussions in Berlin.
What role can Iran play in Syria’s peace negotiations?
Iran should use this influence to encourage Damascus to approach the peace negotiations in a constructive manner.
If Iran proves that it is willing to stand up for peace in Syria then the resistance that there has been to its official inclusion in the Geneva negotiations up to now will gradually disappear.
Turkey will play a very important role in resolving the Syria crisis, yet Germany is also quite rightly expected to fulfil its responsibility as an anchor of stability in Europe and to make its contribution to international peacekeeping.
the German Bundestag recently agreed by a large, cross-party majority to extend the mandate for the use of German Patriot air defence missile systems to protect the population from rocket attacks.
Coordinator for Intersocietal Cooperation with Russia, Central Asia and the Eastern Partnership Countries
As of January 2014, Gernot Erler is Coordinator for Intersocietal Cooperation with Russia, Central Asia and the Eastern Partnership Countries.
Gernot Erler, Coordinator for Intersocietal Cooperation with Russia, Central Asia and the Eastern Partnership Countries
Close German-Turkish relations
Steinmeier and Davutoğlu at the Federal Foreign Office
Their talks focused on bilateral relations, also in connection with the EU, and international issues,
the door must remain open
With regard to the progress of EU accession negotiations with Turkey, Foreign Minister Steinmeier emphasised that Germany was among those who stated that
“the door must remain open for Turkey”.
In view of the most recent internal developments in Turkey, the Foreign Minister added,
Common neighbourhood:
Syria, the Middle East and Ukraine
The meeting between Foreign Minister Steinmeier and his counterpart from Ankara also spotlighted the conflicts in their common neighbourhood.
With regard to Syria, Steinmeier expressed his hope that a second round of talks would bring success:
It is high time we saw some progress to give humanitarian relief agencies the opportunity to alleviate the suffering of civilians in Syria and the neighbouring countries.
With regard to the mediation efforts of US Secretary of State John Kerry in the decades-long conflict between Israelis and Palestinians, however, Steinmeier said he had more hope.
The German and Turkish Foreign Ministers also reiterated their intention to do what they could to support their American counterpart in resolving the Middle East conflict.
US Secretary of State Kerry in Berlin (Text version)
On 31 January Foreign Minister Steinmeier met his US counterpart John Kerry for talks in Berlin.
Thanks to favourable winds, the plane arrived early in Berlin.
restore lost trust
The two politicians first spoke in private before going into a larger meeting.
Opening speech by Minister of State Michael Roth at the Visegrad Group’s New Year concert in the Berliner Dom (Berlin Cathedral)
I’d like to thank Ambassador Dr Józef Czukor for inviting me to attend today’s New Year concert here in the Berliner Dom.
It’s now become quite a tradition for the holder of the Visegrad Group Presidency – this year Hungary – to host this annual concert.
This year we’re celebrating the tenth anniversary of your countries joining the EU.
the centenary of the outbreak of the First World War, the 75th anniversary of the German invasion of Poland and the 25th anniversary of the peaceful revolution in Central and Eastern Europe, which led to the demise of Communism.
the Prague Spring of 1968, the erosion of the Communist system from within by Poland’s Solidarność movement, the Pan-European Picnic at the Hungarian-Austrian border in August 1989 or the descent of thousands of refugees from the GDR on the German Embassy in Prague.
The overcoming of Europe’s division shows that the European Union is the most successful peace and democracy project in Europe’s chequered history. It rightly won the Nobel Peace Prize in 2012.
Above all else, the last few years were marked by a profound economic and financial crisis.
For its internal cohesion is largely founded on our shared values.
That reminds us that our shared stock of values can’t be taken for granted. Rather, it has to be cultivated and defended every day anew.
I cordially invite the Visegrad states to support the German Government’s initiative.
Let’s now work together to ensure that the community of shared values we fought to establish then, remains strong on a durable basis.
In just a few weeks’ time, in May 2014, we’ll be electing a new European Parliament.
Although we’ve already achieved much through our joint efforts to overcome our wide-ranging problems, much remains to be done.
We have to engage them in a debate on the issues at hand, for I firmly believe that we have the better arguments on our side.
He said that international efforts must allow Ukraine to go down a path which offered “economic prospects for the future”.
The Foreign Ministers agreed that Germany and Turkey had achieved a considerable amount through their cooperation.
Against the backdrop of the ongoing German-Turkish Year of Science and Technology, Steinmeier cited examples of joint projects such as the German-Turkish University, the Ernst Reuter Initiative and the Tarabya Cultural Academy.
He said that the most recent decisions by the parliament and the government had generated a little movement in a situation that seemed to be in stalemate.
Kerry and Steinmeier discussed common foreign policy goals.
Behind closed doors, the talks centred on Ukraine and Syria, the Iranian nuclear programme and the Middle East peace process.
At the subsequent press conference, Foreign Minister Steinmeier stressed how important it was to meet in person.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier:
Germany is home to a wealth of international organisations which work on a broad range of global issues.
List of the international organisations in Germany which are not part of the UN
The European Representative Office of the ADB is located in Frankfurt am Main.
The ADB is an institution dedicated to financing regional development.
The bank’s primary goal is poverty reduction.
The League of Arab States was founded in 1945 and has 22 member states:
Algeria, Bahrain, the Comoros, Djibouti, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, the Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, the United Arab Emirates, and Yemen as well as the Palestinian territories, which have not yet achieved independent statehood.
The Arab League’s mission in Germany is based in Berlin.
Franco-German Youth Office
The foundations for the Franco-German Youth Office were laid when the Franco-German Treaty of Friendship, the Élysée Treaty, was signed in 1963.
German-Polish Youth Office
The EASA is the European Union’s aviation safety agency for civilian air traffic.
The EASA is charged with developing common safety and environmental rules at the European level and monitoring their implementation.
Foreign Minister Kerry stressed how glad he was to be back in Berlin.
The EMBL’s key tasks, alongside conducting basic research in molecular biology, comprise training students, scientists and guest scientists, providing services to scientists in member states, developing new instruments and methods for life sciences as well as active technology transfer.
The EPO is the executive arm of the European Patent Organisation.
Austria, Belgium, Brazil, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom.
When asked about the US spying activities, he said:
The US and Germany also want to work together on a solution for Ukraine.
Italy:
They have known each other for years and meet regularly as the Foreign Ministers of their countries,
which was apparent when Foreign Minister Steinmeier came together with his Turkish opposite number Davutoğlu today.
Progress is slow on the Syrian conflict, Steinmeier admitted, but:
above all the conflicts in their common neighbourhood.
Minister of State Roth travelled to Italy as part of a series of first official visits to Germany’s partners in Europe.
The Ministers wasted no time in saying goodbye, as they were to meet again that evening in Munich at the Security Conference.
Death, displacement and flight need a solution, the next step of which is to finally establish local ceasefires and humanitarian corridors.
Unfortunately, the microphones were not cooperating.
Foreign Minister Kerry (original soundtrack):
State visit to India
Here I am thinking of the three million people of Turkish origin who live in Germany and who closely link our two countries.
They quite rightly expect us to pay particular attention to our dialogue with Turkey, something which I am happy to do and believe is important.
In this regard, I am thinking mainly of the terrible yet also dangerous situation in Syria which will in all likelihood remain at the top of our agenda for some time to come.
We have seen impressive economic growth in Turkey, and I say this explicitly in light of the current turbulence experienced by the Turkish Lira.
During our discussions I will ask honest questions and listen carefully in order to understand how my interlocutors assess the situation in their home country.
This topic will naturally be addressed at an appropriate time over the course of further accession talks – which I hope will be taken forward in a constructive manner by both sides.
There is no doubt that the Government in Tehran has influence over Bashar al-Assad’s regime.
Reproduced by kind permission of Hürriyet.
Ban Ki-moon in Berlin
During his visit to Berlin, the UN Secretary-General met Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier.
Together, they attended the inauguration of the Scientific Advisory Board.
It wasn’t the first time the UN Secretary-General had mounted the stairs to the Weltsaal in the Federal Foreign Office.
On 31 January US Secretary of State Kerry landed at Tegel airport.
He was welcomed by Foreign Minister Steinmeier.
The agenda included foreign policy trouble spots as well as bilateral economic cooperation.
Steinmeier reiterated Germany’s criticism of the US intelligence services’ surveillance activities.
But the talks’ main purpose was to prepare for the Munich Security Conference, which both men travelled on to later in the day.
As long as people are in charge of politics - and I hope they will be for a very long time to come - face-to-face meetings between policy-makers will be important, and I think we got off to a good start today.
We will talk with the Ukrainian representatives and, I’m sure, with many other foreign ministers, and will see what we can do, not only to calm the situation in Ukraine, but also to help guide that country, Ukraine, towards a free and democratic future.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier flew there straight after the talks.
This is Ban Ki-moon’s fifth visit to Germany.
But it has still attracted a lot of media attention.
After the meeting, Roth issued the following statement :
Following his visit to India the Federal President will travel to Myanmar for an official visit from 9 to 12 February.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier was also glad to welcome Ban Ki-moon to Berlin.
Steinmeier:
Roth and Moavero in Rome
At a dinner the night before, the two men had spoken at length about the criticism directed at the United Nations.
Steinmeier encouraged anyone who did not believe this to look at the conference on Syria in Geneva –
no one other than the United Nations and its Secretary-General were in a position to bring the two conflicting parties together in one room.
Trip to the Republic of the Union of Myanmar
Ban (original soundtrack):
Federal President Joachim Gauck will travel to the Republic of the Union of Myanmar for an official visit with his partner Daniela Schadt from 9 to 12 February.
The UN Secretary-General stressed the important role played by Germany in the peaceful settlement of disputes and in the fields of disarmament and human rights.
But he again called on Germany to use its foreign policy influence on important issues.
After the press conference, the UN Secretary-General had an important task to take care of.
Together with Foreign Minister Steinmeier he opened the inaugural meeting of the Scientific Advisory Board.
In 2014 Germany and Myanmar are celebrating 60 years of diplomatic relations.
Germany has intensified its relations with Myanmar since the end of military dictatorship and the launch of political reforms.
They were also welcomed by the Board’s patron, UNESCO Director-General Irina Bokova, and moderator Ranga Yogeshwar.
This new Board is comprised of 26 scientists from various regions of the world and from a range of scientific disciplines.
Together the scientists are to investigate global problems such as poverty and threats to our living environment.
In the run-up to the visit of Prime Minister Erdoğan, talks between Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Davutoğlu focused primarily on the trouble spots in Syria and Ukraine as well as on bilateral issues.
At their first bilateral meeting in Berlin, Foreign Ministers Frank-Walter Steinmeier and Ahmet Davutoğlu focused primarily on the crises in their common neighbourhood in Syria, the Middle East and Ukraine, as well as on close German-Turkish cooperation.
Steinmeier and Davutoğlu met in Berlin today in preparation for the visit of Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan to the capital on Tuesday.
Interview with Foreign Minister Steinmeier,“Turkey – an indispensable partner” (published in the daily newspaper Hürriyet on 1 February)
(We) are among those who say that it is probably best to open up Chapters 23 and 24, which deal with human rights and justice and many other things, and then to enter into a serious and viable discussion on what the situation in Turkey looks like at the moment.
That could be a way to achieve what we are actually striving for – making possible a political solution for Syria.
Ukraine at a crossroads
In connection with the current situation in Ukraine, the two Foreign Ministers stressed their desire for a political solution to the confrontation.
“But now we have reached a crossroads.
We now need a change in the constitutional situation which adjusts the balance of the rights of the President and the Prime Minister so that they are more in line with the constitution which was in force until 2004.”
Referring to the discussions with US Secretary of State Kerry and EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs Catherine Ashton, Steinmeier emphasised that letting Ukraine descend into economic chaos after a political solution had been achieved must be avoided.
We agreed to cooperate closely in tackling the economic, social and political challenges facing Europe.
Together we want to contribute to creating a Europe of shared values, which is characterised by growth based on solidarity, employment, education and social cohesion.
I have assured Minister Moavero that Germany will support our Italian partners in every way we can.”
Support for the Italian Council Presidency
They also spoke in favour of intensifying political efforts for growth and employment,
According to the Foreign Minister, the example of Iran showed that after years of negotiations on the country’s nuclear programme an opportunity to defuse the conflict had finally been found.
In his opinion it was not an option to reject military solutions and at the same time refuse to take part in alternative efforts.
The task of the FGYO is to enhance links between young people in Germany and France and to develop their understanding of one another.
The GPYO, based in Potsdam and Warsaw, is modelled on the Franco-German Youth Office.
EIOPA is the European Union’s agency for financial market supervision and has its headquarters in Frankfurt am Main.
The EPO’s core activities involve examining patent applications and granting European patents as well as disseminating information regarding inventions and technical developments, in addition to cooperation activities both in Europe and beyond.
Since its creation in 1967 it has been responsible for operating all ESA satellites and for the global network of ground stations needed to do so.
The data and observations delivered by EUMETSAT satellites make an important contribution to weather forecasting and to environmental and global climate monitoring.
dialogue among friends
Along with European Affairs Minister Moavero, Roth spoke in favour of making a joint contribution to the European Union of values.
Minister of State Michael Roth travelled to Italy on Monday (3 February) as part of a series of first official visits to Germany’s partners in Europe.
While there, Roth engaged in political talks with European Affairs Minister Moavero Milanesi, Deputy Foreign Minister Marta Dassù and members of the Italian parliament.
At the beginning of his visit to Rome, Minister of State Roth met Italy’s European Affairs Minister Enzo Moavero Milanesi for an in-depth discussion.
“The intensive, friendly dialogue I have enjoyed with European Affairs Minister Moavero Milanesi today reflects the trust that characterises relations between Germany and Italy.
They are the very foundations of the European identity we want to safeguard for the future.
As it assumes the EU Council Presidency in the second half of this year, special responsibility will be coming Italy’s way.
In their talks, Minister of State Roth and his Italian counterpart stressed the importance of bringing negotiations on creating a banking union to a timely conclusion.
saying Europe had to throw itself into fighting the dramatically high levels of youth unemployment.
Afterwards, Minister of State Roth had talks with Deputy Foreign Minister Marta Dassù and meetings with members of the Italian parliament.
The European Commission has a Representation in every member state of the European Union.
They act as the European Commission’s “voice and ears”.
In Germany the Representation in Berlin along with the Offices in Bonn and Munich serve as links between German policy makers and the public on the one hand, and the Commission headquarters in Brussels on the other.
The European Central Bank is based in Frankfurt am Main.
It is a body of the European Union and has the task of managing the single currency and maintaining price stability in the EU.
It is charged with safeguarding the stability of the financial system by ensuring adequate monitoring of financial markets and institutions.
The Global Crop Diversity Trust develops regional conservation strategies.
The GCDT headquarters have been based in Bonn since 2013.
Germany has been a member of the IOM since 1954.
The changes cannot take effect without his signature.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier has warned the Ukrainian President against playing for time.
Meanwhile, opposition protests continue.
At a joint press conference with UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon on Thursday (30 January), Foreign Minister Steinmeier called on the Ukrainian President to honour the promises made to the opposition:
My appeal to the President, to Ukraine’s leaders, is as follows:
Foreign Minister Steinmeier calls on Ukraine’s leaders to stop playing for time and to honour their promises to the opposition.
IRENA advises industrialised and developing countries on introducing renewable energies.
there has been progress in talks with the opposition, but do now put your money where your mouth is and do what you promised the opposition.
The opposition criticised the fact that the amnesty was made subject to certain conditions,
which stipulate, for instance, that the streets and government buildings occupied by the demonstrators have to be cleared.
“It is good that there is agreement on the amnesty.
The problem is that it is now being made contingent on a large number of conditions.”
The German Foreign Minister also urged people not to be fundamentally dissatisfied with the progress there had been in the last two days, pointing out that
the Government had resigned and the parliament had revoked the law restricting political involvement.
The German Foreign Minister went on:
Things have advanced a little way in Ukraine.
There is a chance that all this could lead to something that looks like a political solution.
But I do only say a chance, because the events of yesterday and the debates about the amnesty have revealed a disparity between what the negotiating parties, the opposition and the President, discuss and what is actually put into practice in the end.
Four people have since died and hundreds more have been injured in the violent clashes between the security forces and opponents of the Government.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier subsequently declared that the route taken by President Yanukovych was a dead end and that
repression must not be the response to a politically contentious debate.
The protests criticising the Government spread from Kyiv across the whole country over recent weeks.
The demonstrators have occupied numerous government buildings, primarily in western Ukraine.
The demonstrations against the Government were triggered by President Yanukovych’s refusal to sign the free-trade agreement between Ukraine and the European Union because he wanted to forge closer ties between his country and Russia.
Following the resignation of the Government and the Ukrainian parliament’s revocation of a series of laws restricting freedom of the press and freedom of assembly, all eyes are now on President Viktor Yanukovych.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier was in part referring to the law granting amnesty to arrested demonstrators, which the Ukrainian parliament had passed on Wednesday evening (29 January) after a heated debate.
Federal Foreign Minister Steinmeier commented as follows:
chance of a political solution
Film: Visit by Ban Ki-moon / Inaugural meeting of the Scientific Advisory Board
In some way, we consider it recognition of the work that Germany has done in and for the United Nations over the past years and decades.
Ban Ki-moon thanked Steinmeier for his hospitality – in German!
They will inform the United Nations of their findings.
In this way, voices from various disciplines are to form a harmonious whole and help ensure that the United Nations remains indispensable in meeting global challenges.
The Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP)
Existing hurdles hampering transatlantic trade are to be dismantled.
Towards a transatlantic economic agreement - the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP)
All this is set to change.
Hamburg’s container terminal
The NATO management agency NETMA is based in Unterhaching near Munich.
On behalf of the Participating Nations the United Kingdom, Germany, Italy and Spain, it is responsible for the design, production and procurement of Eurofighter and Tornado aircraft as well as for the technical and logistical support during the weapons systems’ operation.
Together, the European Union and the United States account for about 50% of the global Gross Domestic Product (GDP).
The organisation was founded by Germany, France, the United Kingdom and Italy.
Spain and Belgium joined later on.
Even today, each is the other’s most important partner in both foreign trade and direct investment.
Alongside the Central Office in Bonn, Programme Divisions are run in Paris, Rome, La Spezia, Seville and Toulouse.
It often sets standards for global rules governing international trade or development cooperation.
Two-way investments to date add up to nearly three trillion euros.
Prime Minister Erdoğan visits Berlin
market access
regulatory issues and non-tariff trade barriers
Giving special attention to dialogue with Turkey is something about which Federal Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier is firmly convinced.
Today Steinmeier met Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan for talks in Berlin.
Turkey – an indispensable partner
In preparation for the visit of Prime Minister Erdoğan, Steinmeier already met his Turkish opposite number Ahmet Davutoğlu in Berlin on Monday.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier with Prime Minister Erdoğan
On Tuesday Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan then arrived in the German capital.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier met him at the Turkish Embassy for intensive dialogue.
Beforehand Erdoğan had already held talks with Federal Chancellor Angela Merkel in the course of his Berlin visit.
To read more on the talks, go to external link to Federal Government site.
In the run-up to the visit Foreign Minister Steinmeier had described Turkey as an important and indispensable partner in an interview with the daily newspaper Hürriyet.
He advocated paying special attention to dialogue with Turkey.
He said that this was what the three million people of Turkish origin living in Germany expected.
However, Steinmeier also sees crucial significance for Turkey in its geostrategic location with regard to trouble spots such as Syria.
He stated that he is therefore working to extend the strategic dialogue between Germany and Turkey.
Read Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s interview in full here:
“Turkey – an indispensable partner”(published in the daily newspaper Hürriyet on 1 February)
On Monday Foreign Minister Steinmeier welcomed his Turkish counterpart Davutoğlu to the Federal Foreign Office.
Their talks focused on bilateral relations, also in connection with the EU, and international issues,
With regard to the mediation efforts of US Secretary of State John Kerry in the decades-long conflict between Israelis and Palestinians, however, Steinmeier said he had more hope.
The German and Turkish Foreign Ministers also reiterated their intention to do what they could to support their American counterpart in resolving the Middle East conflict.
Ukraine at a crossroads
Foreign Minister Steinmeier underscored his conviction that this is possible,
citing that a little movement had been generated in a situation that seemed to be in stalemate.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier calls on Ukraine’s leaders to put into practice what they have pledged.
Though some small advances have been made in recent days, the situation, as Foreign Minister Steinmeier sees it, remains highly complex and volatile.
In addition to the macroeconomic benefits for both sides, the agreement would also be “a commitment to a global world in which shared values and common economic activities can be better promoted”, to quote Chancellor Angela Merkel.
He is therefore calling on the two sides not to play with fire around the “powder keg”, as he described Ukraine.
Not much time to implement pledges
Foreign Minister Steinmeier at the Munich Security Conference
TTIP offers an opportunity to bring the US and the EU closer at political level and cement the transatlantic friendship.
The spotlight was on the crisis in Ukraine at this year’s Munich Security Conference as well.
Negotiations with the US and consultations with civil society
The international community is looking intensively at the issue of a political solution to the conflict about the country’s future direction, which has been ongoing for two months now.
On the margins of the conference, Foreign Minister Steinmeier met his Ukrainian counterpart, Leonid Kozhara, and representatives of the Opposition.
He issued the following statement to the Bild am Sonntag newspaper (2 February) on the subject of those talks:
Although a little progress has been made, Steinmeier warns both sides against playing with fire around the “powder keg”.
The two sides, President and Opposition, need to find a way out of the crisis. President Yanukovych needs to put into practice what he has pledged.
There is not much time left for that to happen.
Steinmeier convinced that political solution is possible
At the beginning of the conference, Foreign Minister Steinmeier had already spoken to his Ukrainian counterpart to advocate that opposition activist Dmytro Bulatov be permitted to travel to Europe for medical treatment.
Referring to the discussions with US Secretary of State Kerry and EU
High Representative for Foreign Affairs Catherine Ashton, Steinmeier emphasised that letting Ukraine descend into economic chaos after a political solution had been achieved must be avoided.
He had been very severely injured and apparently tortured the previous week.
Following the two Foreign Ministers’ talks, Bulatov was able to leave the country on Sunday.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier welcomed the decision.
Protests in Kyiv continue
The parliament has also revoked the law restricting political involvement.
Contact between the two conflict parties was reestablished on Monday,
and Foreign Minister Steinmeier stressed in the evening’s news programme Tagesthemen that there may have been some small advances made.
The possibility of releasing prisoners had been among the topics discussed, he said.
Steinmeier nonetheless warned that the hardest part was yet to come.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier had previously emphasised his conviction that the confrontation could be settled by political means during a press conference with his Turkish opposite number, Ahmet Davutoğlu.
He went on to issue the following statement:
“But now we have reached a crossroads.
We now need a change in the constitutional situation which adjusts the balance of the rights of the President and the Prime Minister so that they are more in line with the constitution which was in force until 2004.”
Demonstrations continue despite freezing temperatures
However, Steinmeier furthermore warned that Ukraine must not be allowed to descend into economic chaos after a political solution had been achieved.
International efforts, he said, must allow Ukraine to go down a path which offered “economic prospects for the future”.
Four people were killed and several hundred injured.
The protests in Kyiv’s Independence Square, ongoing for more than two months, saw further escalation recently.
He reported having discussed the matter with US Secretary of State John Kerry and EU High Representative Catherine Ashton in Munich at the weekend.
Economic prospects needed
From 4 to 9 February, Federal President Joachim Gauck is on a state visit to the Republic of India with his partner Daniela Schadt.
During his first extended trip to Asia in his term in office, the Federal President will hold political talks with Indian President Pranab Mukherjee, Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, Opposition leader Sushma Swaraj, leader of the Congress Party Sonia Gandhi and others.
Talks with representatives of Indian civil society will focus on social and human-rights issues, including above all the situation of women.
The Federal President will leave New Delhi for Bangalore, an emerging economic powerhouse in India.
He will attend a conference on vocational training which will focus on issues of training skilled workers for India’s labour market.
In addition to these cities, the Federal President will also visit rural India.
The majority of the Indian population still live outwith the urban centres.
A visit to a German development cooperation project will show how projects of the kind help people in rural areas to create jobs and open up opportunities to earn a living.
India is an important strategic partner for Germany in South Asia – both in political and economic terms.
In New Delhi the Federal President is accompanied by Gerd Müller, the Federal Minister for Economic Cooperation and Development.
The Federal President will also be accompanied on his trip to India by a delegation from German SMEs and larger companies.
During his first extended trip to Asia in his term in office, the Federal President will hold political talks with Indian President Pranab Mukherjee and others.
He will also meet representatives of Indian civil society and address human-rights issues.
In the capital, Nay Pyi Taw, political talks are planned with President Thein Sein and Nobel Peace Prize laureate and leader of the Opposition Aung San Suu Kyi, among others, in order to support the country’s process of transition.
In Rangoon the Federal President will meet representatives of Myanmar’s civil society.
While there, he will also open the Delegate Office of German Industry and Commerce to promote economic relations and the Goethe-Institut to boost cultural exchange.
The Federal President will be accompanied on his trip to Myanmar by a delegation from German SMEs and larger companies.
The Federal President’s first extended trip to Asia in his term in office begins with a state visit to the Republic of India from 4 to 9 February.
The Government, he said, now had to put what it had pledged into practice in a meaningful way to allow the country to move towards a political solution.
Vitali Klitschko and Arseniy Yatsenyuk deserve our respect for their courage in fighting for a peaceful solution in Kyiv.
The Ukrainian Government resigned last week and only remains in place in an interim capacity.
Gravitating around Opposition leader Vitali Klitschko and former Economics Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk, the Government’s opponents are calling for the EU-Ukrainian association agreement to be signed and, now, for President Yanukovych to resign and new elections to be held.
Frequently asked questions and answers (in German)
Other publications by the Federal Government:
The German Government, Land North Rhine-Westphalia and the Federal City of Bonn work to ensure that the UN organisations enjoy the support of a competent and dynamic working environment.
There are now around 150 institutions concerned with development or environment policy which have their headquarters or offices in Bonn. Among them are the Center for Development Research at the University of Bonn, the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH, the German Development Institute as well as many semi-governmental, church and private institutions.
Furthermore, a number of globally operating international NGOs have established their base in Bonn, all of them committed to the overarching goal of sustainable development.
Between 1997 and 2010, the headquarters of nine major NGOs, including Fairtrade Labelling Organizations International (FLO) and the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC), moved to Bonn.
The informal network Bonn International NGOs was established in 2009 to strengthen cooperation among these NGOs.
The Federal Foreign Office has a division in Bonn that serves as a point of contact for the international organisations based in Germany.
> Division VN 09 in Bonn
Poverty reduction and migration, disaster relief and climate protection, biodiversity and renewable energies, peacekeeping and economic development, meteorological research and aerospace – the diversity of topics which these organisations deal with comprises the whole spectrum of current and future challenges.
The Federal Foreign Office in Bonn – point of contact for international organisations based in Germany
In the UN City of Bonn the Federal Foreign Office serves as the point of contact for international organisations.
The key task of the competent Bonn-based division is the political coordination of matters related to the UN Campus in Bonn.
This includes issues associated with location and headquarters agreements with UN organisations and other international organisations in Bonn and at other German sites.
Another focal point is providing support to the employees of the 27 UN organisations and other international organisations currently based in Germany.
They include numerous non-governmental organisations based in the Federal Republic of Germany.
ADB – Asian Development Bank
It provides funding for social and business projects which aim to improve the living conditions of people in Asia.
Its policies are developed in line with the Millennium Development Goals.
The Arab League has its headquarters in Cairo.
The Franco-German Youth Office (FGYO) is an international organisation based in Paris and Berlin, which serves to foster Franco-German cooperation.
Official website of the organisation
The Foreign Ministers of Germany and Poland signed the Formation Agreement which established the GPYO on 17 June 1991.
In the light of the two countries’ difficult shared history, the aim is to give young people from Poland and Germany the chance to get to know their neighbour’s people and culture, to develop friendships and overcome prejudices.
EASA – European Aviation Safety Agency
It was set up on 15 July 2002 and has had its headquarters in Cologne’s Deutz district since November 2004.
Some 500 members of staff from all member states now work there.
It also provides technical expertise, training and research and makes recommendations to the European Commission on aviation safety and international agreements.
EIOPA – European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority
It is one of the three European Supervisory Authorities which comprise the European System of Financial Supervisors (ESFS).
The precursor to the EIOPA was the Committee of the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Supervisors. The EIOPA took over its tasks on 1 January 2011.
EMBL – European Molecular Biology Laboratory
The EMBL is a basic research institute run with public research funding from 20 member states as well as Australia as an associate member.
The main laboratory with approx. 900 members of staff is located in Heidelberg.
EPO – European Patent Office
It offers inventors a uniform application procedure which enables them to seek patent protection in up to 40 European countries.
ESA: EAC – European Astronaut Centre
The European Astronaut Centre (EAC) of the European Space Agency ESA is a centre of excellence for astronaut selection, training, medical support and surveillance in the preparation for and during missions in space.
The EAC trains astronauts and ground operations personnel for all European-built International Space Station hardware.
The European Astronaut Centre was founded in 1990 near Cologne, where over 100 members of staff work today.
ESA: ESOC – satellite control centre
The European Space Operations Centre (ESOC) in Darmstadt is the European satellite control centre of the European Space Agency (ESA).
ESOC flight dynamics specialists take charge of determining and predicting satellite trajectories as well as their position and orientation in space.
ESO – European Southern Observatory
The European Southern Observatory (ESO) which has its headquarters in Garching near Munich is the foremost European organisation in astronomical research.
The organisation is funded by its 15 member states:
The ESO facilitates cutting-edge astronomical research by designing, building and operating powerful ground-based telescopes.
EUMETSAT – European Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites
EUMETSAT is based in Darmstadt and currently operates the geostationary satellites Meteosat-8, -9 and -10 over Europe and Africa, as well as Meteosat-7 over the Indian Ocean.
EUMETSAT also operates two Metop satellites which fly in a lower polar orbit and Jason-2, the satellite which collects oceanographic data.
Today’s Bonn Office was initially established as a Representation in the former federal capital in March 1954, making it the first in the history of the European Commission.
ECB – European Central Bank
Moreover, the ECB is responsible for guiding and implementing the EU’s economic and monetary policy.
The ECB and the national central banks of all 28 EU member states cooperate within the European System of Central Banks.
In addition to this, the ECB works closely with the central banks in the euro area, i.e. all EU countries that have adopted the euro.
GCDT – Global Crop Diversity Trust
The Global Crop Diversity Trust (GCDT) was established in 2005 as an independent international organisation which would work to conserve crop diversity around the world.
Amongst others it works with the Norwegian Government and the Nordic Genetic Resource Center to manage the Svalbard Global Seed Vault, which was built as a back-up seed vault for duplicates of existing collections of seeds from gene banks. It is located on the island of Spitsbergen (Svalbard).
IOM – International Organization for Migration
The IOM is represented in Germany with offices in Berlin and Nuremberg. Their main areas of activity include assisted voluntary returns, 3rd country migration, counter trafficking and integration of migrants.
The IOM’s goals are to encourage social and economic development through migration, uphold the human dignity and well-being of migrants and advance the understanding of migration issues.
The IOM has 149 members.
IITC – IRENA Innovation and Technology Centre
The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) was founded in Bonn in January 2009 as the result of an initiative from Germany.
The IITC, with its headquarters in Bonn, is a consultative body which receives funding from the Federal Government.
It provides specialist information for the promotion of renewable energies in industrialised countries, as well as in particular in developing and emerging economies. In cooperation with the IRENA headquarters in Abu Dhabi, the organisation contributes to the global transition to resource-efficient technologies.
NETMA – NATO Eurofighter and Tornado Management Agency, responsible for their design, production and logistical operations
Please go to http://www.nato.int/
OCCAR – Organisation for Joint Armament Cooperation
OCCAR, based in Bonn, is tasked with coordinating existing and future armament projects in Europe, as well as long-term need and policy for investment in research and technology.
OCCAR officially began operations in January 2001.
OECD – Berlin Centre
The OECD Berlin Centre represents the OECD in German-speaking countries.
The Centre acts both as a service centre and a link between the OECD headquarters in Paris and the different OECD partners in Germany, Austria and Switzerland.
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) has 34 member countries around the world, all of which are committed to democracy and the market economy.
The OECD Secretariat collects and analyses data on an extremely broad range of topics.
Aga Khan visits Berlin
To this end, the EU and the US decided in June 2013 to negotiate an agreement on a Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP).
Within the European Union, the free movement of goods and services has come to be something we take for granted.
Yet anyone wishing to export goods to the United States, to offer services there or to make an investment still needs to overcome quite a number of bureaucratic obstacles.
Customs duties and overlapping approval procedures, e.g. for cars or medical supplies, cost consumers on both sides of the Atlantic unnecessary money.
A common economic area for 800 million people
Trade and services reach a daily volume of two billion euros.
Closer cooperation between the world’s two most powerful economic regions will generate new synergies and new momentum.
According to independent surveys, the annual increase in GDP amounts to up to 119 billion euros in the EU and up to 95 billion in the US.
A study by the Ifo Institute for Economic Research concludes that the alignment of laws and regulations could generate up to 110,000 new jobs in Germany and a total of around 400,000 in the EU.
Negotiations on the TTIP commenced in July 2013. Rounds of talks will take place every two months until they are finalised in 2015.
The European Commission was given the green light by the member states to negotiate on behalf of the European Union, while the US will be represented by its Trade Representative.
The member states are closely involved in the preparation of and follow-up to the negotiations.
By the same token, business associations, non-governmental organisations from the fields of the environment and consumer protection, trade unions and research institutes are regularly informed and consulted.
Negotiations are expected to yield ambitious results in the following major areas:
rules, principles and new forms of cooperation to tackle common challenges in world trade and make the most of opportunities
Important consultation process on investment protection
The EU’s high standards of environmental, consumer and social protection will not be lowered by the agreement.
Due to unsettled issues regarding investment protection, the EU will launch three months of public consultations this March before resuming talks with the US on this part of the agreement.
At the next EU-US summit in Brussels in March, the TTIP will be at the top of the agenda.
Brochure
Startseite: Progress report on Afghanistan
Bild: At a demonstration in Kabul
Germany is and will remain one of Afghanistan’s most important partners.
Our country continues to provide the third largest international contingent in Afghanistan.
This is why an annual report to review Germany’s engagement and chart its future course is so important.
In line with previous reports, it is divided up into the three central areas of international engagement in the country: security, state structures and governance as well as reconstruction and development.
2014: A turning point in Afghanistan’s history
Bild: Afghan police checking a car and its occupants in Kabul
2014 will be an eventful year in Afghanistan.
It will be marked by far-reaching changes.
For the Afghan people are set to elect a new President in April 2014.
Provincial council elections will take place at the same time throughout the country.
What is more, Afghanistan’s security forces are preparing to take over full responsibility for security from the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) on 31 December 2014.
The process of handing over responsibility for security to Afghanistan and the withdrawal of international troops is far advanced:
Support also beyond 2014
Foreign Minister Steinmeier with Prince Karim Aga Khan
Foreign Minister Steinmeier met Prince Karim Aga Khan today (5 February).
Their conversation focused on cooperation between the German Government and the Aga Khan Development Network (AKDN) to help stabilise fragile states.
The AKDN is one of the world’s largest non-governmental organisations. In part with support from the Federal Foreign Office, it conducts projects in the fields of healthcare, education and culture, primarily in Asia and East Africa.
Germany is prepared to shoulder responsibility and to provide between 600 and 800 troops for the advisory and training mission for an initial period of two years.
Moreover, the conditions in Afghanistan itself have to be right:
Bild: Members of the Afghan police force receive training on how to deal with domestic violence
The international community will remain involved in civilian reconstruction and Afghanistan’s development even after 2014.
Germany will continue to provide up to 430 million euros each year for this until at least 2016.
Afghanistan has made progress in meeting its commitments.
2014 progress report:
Highlighting problematic areas
The German Government believes that the progress report reveals both positive and negative aspects:
But the report also highlights problematic areas.
For example, it describes the continued difficult security situation in Afghanistan.
Nor has the peace and reconciliation process in Afghanistan led yet to a serious dialogue between the Afghan Government and the Taliban.
Both countries want to work closer together in the peace and reconciliation process.
This is especially important in view of Pakistan’s special relations with the Taliban, which stretch back to the early 1990s.
Since 2010 the progress report on Afghanistan for the information of the German Bundestag has been issued annually.
The reports are drawn up by the Special Representative of the Federal Government for Afghanistan and Pakistan, Michael Koch, in cooperation with the Federal Chancellery and the various ministries dealing with Afghanistan-related questions.
An interim report is published every summer.
The latest progress report of January 2014 will also be available in English shortly.
Previous progress reports
Progress report on Afghanistan – interim report June 2013, PDF | 1 MB
Progress report on Afghanistan for the information of the German Bundestag, November 2012, PDF | 2 MB
Progress report on Afghanistan – interim report July 2011, PDF | 697 KB
The purpose of the progress reports is to provide information to the German Bundestag on the situation in Afghanistan.
They describe the current situation in the country, outline the international engagement and provide an overview of forthcoming events.
The latest progress report was published on 5 February 2014.
it documents the progress made in the sphere of economic development and in the handover of responsibility for security.
At the same time, the German Government remains convinced that only such a political dialogue process can bring durable peace to Afghanistan.
The purpose of the German Government’s progress reports is to provide information to the German Bundestag.
Furthermore, Germany is the third-largest contributor of funds for civilian reconstruction and the promotion of the country’s development.
The Afghan security forces already shoulder responsibility for the security of 80 per cent of Afghanistan’s population.
among other things, the Afghan Government must issue a formal invitation and a status of forces agreement must be concluded between NATO and Afghanistan.
One positive aspect highlighted in the report is the cautious détente between Afghanistan and Pakistan in the last few months.
Minister of State Roth on the start of the Berlinale in the Franco-German Youth Office
The Commissioner for Franco-German Cooperation, Minister of State Michael Roth, is meeting the young film jury of the “FGYO Prize – Dialogue en perspective” in the Franco-German Youth Office in Berlin tomorrow.
Minister of State Roth said the following with reference to the meeting:
In the next few days many film enthusiasts from France will come to Berlin in order to celebrate cinema in all of its international diversity.
The Franco-German Youth Office’s film prize offers young people a terrific opportunity to dive into the action of the film festival and drink in the Berlinale atmosphere.
Minister of State Roth and Ambassador Gourdault-Montagne will be received by the Secretary-Generals of the Franco-German Youth Office, Markus Ingenlath and Béatrice Angrand.
The young cineastes are invited to watch and evaluate all films produced by young German filmmakers.
A stable partnership
Their talks focused on bilateral relations.
Martonyi and Steinmeier at their joint press conference
Foreign Minister Steinmeier has met with his Hungarian counterpart János Martonyi today.
At a joint press conference Steinmeier emphasised that Germany and Hungary are linked through a stable partnership.
However, the Afghan Government has hitherto not shown sufficient resolve in fighting corruption or in other spheres.
Progress report on Afghanistan, December 2011, PDF | 2 MB
At the start of the joint press conference with his Hungarian counterpart János Martonyi Foreign Minister Steinmeier looked back on the two countries' shared history:
Along with the French Ambassador in Berlin, Maurice Gourdault-Montagne, he will meet the seven members of the jury of the film prize as well as the head of the jury, director Denis Dercourt, on Thursday (6 February). They will discuss the importance of German cinema in France, the role of cinema in conflict regions and Franco-German cultural cooperation.
I am looking forward to a stimulating discussion with them about the strength of cultural ties between our two countries.
The film jury, chaired by director Denis Dercourt, comprises three members from Germany, three from France and one from Israel, aged between 20 and 26 years old.
5000 euros of prize money is up for grabs for the jury’s favourite.
Close economic relations
Bundeswehr mission in Mali expanded
Steinmeier and Martonyi
German troops are there to support the European Union Training Mission (EUTM).
The plans still need to be approved by the German Bundestag.
More than 3000 German companies were currently operating and creating jobs in Hungary.
Europe and Ukraine
This applied not only to German investment in Hungary but also to Hungarian exports to Germany and tourism, he added.
German-Hungarian relations
Their talks focused on bilateral relations between Germany and Hungary as well as on the European Union and the situation in Ukraine.
Steinmeier acknowledged that there had been “critical discussions” not all that long ago, for instance about controversial legislative amendments in Hungary or investment conditions for German companies.
He went on to say that some promising developments were noticeable in economic relations between Hungary and Germany.
Hungary’s Foreign Minister, in turn, reaffirmed that Germany was Hungary’s most important trading partner.
In addition to bilateral relations, shaping Europe’s political role and the current situation in Ukraine were on the agenda.
Malian soldiers receiving Bundeswehr training as part of EUTM
The personnel ceiling is also to be raised from 180 to 250 soldiers, meaning that more German instructors could be sent to Mali in future.
Training and advice for the Malian armed forces
The mission objective is to support the Malian armed forces and Ministry of Defence by providing training and advice.
Around 100 German soldiers are currently stationed in Mali.
Involvement in the UN mission MINUSMA
Unloading a German Transall plane in Bamako
The UN stabilisation mission MINUSMA (Mission multidimensionelle integrée pour la stabilisation au Mali) is also in operation in Mali.
The Bundestag voted on 27 June 2013 to mandate the involvement of armed German troops in MINUSMA until 30 June 2014. The personnel ceiling for that mission is 150 soldiers.
The Bundeswehr currently has around 70 senior officers and two Transall transport aircraft involved in MINUSMA.
Germany has pledged a total of 13.65 million euros in humanitarian aid for Mali since the end of 2011.
Over the 2013-2014 period, the German Government is spending more than 100 million euros as development cooperation activities are incrementally resumed.
Mali has been beset by severe crisis since early 2012.
Fighting between Government troops and Tuareg rebels broke out in the north of the country in January 2012. The situation was exacerbated by a coup which overthrew the President.
In response to a request from the Malian Government, France decided in favour of military intervention in early 2013.
The Malian armed forces have now regained control of large parts of northern Mali.
Presidential and parliamentary elections in, respectively, August and December 2013 brought the country’s process of political transition to a formal end.
President Boubacar Keita thereafter travelled to Berlin on an official visit.
German assistance for Mali
he stated that Germany and Hungary associated very different events with the year of remembrance 2014.
On the one hand there was the outbreak of World War I in 1914 with its consequences
It is now 25 years ago that the Iron Curtain was torn down – with Hungary’s invaluable help – and that many people from the former GDR embarked on the road to freedom.
This kicked off a series of events which ultimately led to German unity.
Steinmeier stated that this common shared history had left its mark on bilateral relations between the two countries and was the reason for the desire to overcome differences of opinion.
He stated that the resulting personal contacts are helping to create a stable partnership between Germany and Hungary.
The Federal Cabinet adopted a decision on 5 February to extend the mandate for Bundeswehr involvement in Mali.
The Federal Cabinet adopted a decision on 5 February to extend and expand the mandate for Bundeswehr involvement in Mali.
The Cabinet decision envisages an extension of one year to the EUTM mandate, taking it to 28 February 2015.
and on the other there was an anniversary they could celebrate together, the fall of the Berlin Wall. He added:
We are grateful [to Hungary] to this very day and will not forget what the country did for us.
Franco-German exchange of ideas in Berlin
Estonian Foreign Minister Paet at the Federal Foreign Office
Against the backdrop of excellent bilateral relations, Steinmeier and Paet held a discussion which focused on the efforts to further develop the Economic and Monetary Union, the situation in Ukraine and NATO cooperation, in particular in Afghanistan.
Minister of State Roth met his French counterpart, European Affairs Minister Repentin, at Villa Borsig on 5 February.
The agenda of the two commissioners for bilateral cooperation included preparations for the upcoming Franco-German Council of Ministers.
Germany and Slovakia –
like-minded partners in Europe
Minister of State for Europe Roth and his Slovak counterpart Javorčik
The German Minister of State for Europe and the Slovak State Secretary responsible for European affairs met in Berlin for a first exchange of views.
An anchor of regional stability in Africa
Relations between Germany and Slovakia are close and amicable, Roth and Javorčik agreed.
Frank-Walter Steinmeier and Amina Mohamed
In European matters the two countries held very similar views.
After the talks Minister of State Roth commented as follows:
Bilateral relations between Germany and Kenya have a long history.
When Kenya achieved independence in 1963, Germany was the first country to grant diplomatic recognition to the young state.
On many European issues Germany and Slovakia are like-minded partners.
He announced that a business delegation led by former German President Horst Köhler was expected to travel to Kenya later this year, enticing yet more German businesses to the region.
Foreign Secretary Mohamed affirmed that Kenya wanted to attract more German companies and investors.
She also expressed the hope that German support and partnership would be forthcoming with respect to the development of her country and the region.
Somalia and South Sudan
We need a fresh perspective on Africa
Steinmeier and Mohamed both expressed their hope that the agreements reached in Addis Ababa would bring lasting peace to the still young country.
it was vital to create humanitarian corridors to enable refugees and internally displaced persons to return home as quickly as possible.
A first step is to be taken the week after next,
Given its economic and political track record, Slovakia has an important role to play in Central Europe.
German support for the people in the Sudan
At the first meeting of Minister of State for Europe Michael Roth and his Slovak counterpart Javorčik the focus was on European policy coordination and cooperation in the Visegrad Group.
Close ties between neighbours
European and German companies often conducted their entire East African operations from headquarters in Kenya.
Kenya is a good illustration of the fact that Africa is changing quicker than European perceptions of the continent.
We still view Africa as a continent plagued by crises and conflicts.
If we were to look at a large swathe of East Africa, for example, we could not overlook the emergence of anchors of stability such as Kenya, anchors we need to deal with the trouble spots.
He noted that Kenya was, for example, trying to use its influence in Somalia in order to foster stability in the country.
Developments in South Sudan were also discussed by the two foreign policy heads.
Mohamed said that the biggest challenge in this context was the tense humanitarian situation:
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and his Kenyan counterpart Amina Mohamed spoke in Berlin today (6 February) about crises and opportunities on the African continent.
To this very day, Germany and Kenya enjoy close political, economic and cultural relations – as Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier stressed following his talks with his Kenyan counterpart Amina Mohamed.
Steinmeier singled out Kenya’s economic progress as a particular anchor of stability:
Foreign Minister Steinmeier sees Kenya as proof that one should not only think of crises and conflicts when Africa is mentioned:
And although it does have plenty of those, that’s not the whole picture.
The German Foreign Minister concluded by repeating that, given the continent’s diffuse image, the German Government, too, needed to readjust its focus on today’s Africa.
when officials from various ministries will gather in the Federal Foreign Office to discuss diverse facets of modern Africa – including current trouble spots but also anchors of regional stability such as Kenya.
The Sudan and South Sudan – an overview
Confidence in our Italian partners
Foreign Minister Steinmeier is travelling to Rome today.
Steinmeier in Rome for first talks
The Spanish Steps in Rome
As part of a series of first official visits to Germany’s partners in Europe, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier is travelling to Italy on Friday (7 February) for political talks.
Discussions with President Napolitano, Prime Minister Letta and Foreign Minister Bonino will focus on European and bilateral issues as well as the international agenda.
Speaking to the Italian daily Corriere della sera before his trip, Foreign Minister Steinmeier said he had confidence in our Italian partners. He made it clear that Italy not only represented a political heavyweight in the sphere of European integration,
but also, thanks to its economic substance and creative industrial culture, possessed “fertile ground for growth and jobs – when the right framework conditions prevail”.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier urged that Italy’s reform efforts be continued.
But this is the right course.
As a large member state, Italy shares responsibility for Europe as a whole too.
Germany’s solidarity is not in doubt.
Italy faces major challenges
The German Foreign Minister will be meeting Italy’s leaders for bilateral talks in Rome.
Meetings are planned with President Giorgio Napolitano and Prime Minister Enrico Letta.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier will also be holding his first bilateral talks with his opposite number in Italy, Emma Bonino.
On Thursday (6 February) Minister of State for Europe Michael Roth had talks with his Slovak counterpart Peter Javorčik in Berlin.
The main focus of this first meeting was European policy coordination and cooperation in the Visegrad Group.
This was also very clear when we discussed, for example, the need to further deepen the economic and monetary union.
It is highly active in the Visegrad Group – a political grouping of four Central European countries – and this summer will once again take over its presidency.
Particularly in connection with the Eastern Partnership, the efforts to draw the countries of the Western Balkans closer to the EU and our shared commitment to the EU’s fundamental values, we are keen to work closely together.
Germany and Slovakia recently celebrated the 20th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations.
They are close partners in the EU and in NATO.
The around 4,700 Carpathian Germans in Slovakia and the 100,000-strong Slovakian community in Germany create a strong bond between the two countries.
Economic trends in Germany also affect Slovakia, since the two countries’ industrial sectors are closely integrated.
Over the past two decades some 400 German companies have created over 100,000 jobs in Slovakia.
One important topic will be Italy’s assumption of the Presidency of the EU Council.
The discussions will concentrate both on the long-standing good relations between the two countries and on the the current European agenda.
Another focus will be the international agenda,
chiefly the current conflict situations in Syria, Ukraine and the Middle East.
Italy: dialogue among friends
He will be engaging in talks primarily to discuss bilateral and European cooperation, alongside current international issues.
Naturally, I know what a great challenge it presents to stay on course with reforms, not least in the complex domestic system that Italy has.
Startseite: Minister of State Roth at the Franco-German Youth Office
Minister of State Roth met the young film jury of the “FGYO Prize – Dialogue en perspective” at the Franco-German Youth Office on 6 February.
They discussed the importance of German cinema in France, the role of cinema in conflict regions and Franco-German cultural cooperation.
Minister of State Roth at the Franco-German Youth Office
Bild: Minister of State Roth with the jury members at the FGYO
The Commissioner for Franco-German Cooperation, Minister of State Michael Roth, met the young film jury of the “FGYO Prize – Dialogue en perspective” at the Franco-German Youth Office in Berlin on 6 February.
Along with the French Ambassador in Berlin, Maurice Gourdault-Montagne, he met the seven members of the jury of the film prize as well as the head of the jury, director Denis Dercourt, to discuss the importance of German cinema in France, the role of cinema in conflict regions and Franco-German cultural cooperation.
The young jury members – German, French and this year one Israeli – who will jointly choose a winning film will certainly have a remarkable time.
The FGYO has offered the “FGYO Prize – Dialogue en perspective” together with the section of the Berlinale Perspektive Deutsches Kino since 2004.
Ahead of the meeting, Minister of State Roth stated:
The prize should go to a film which manages to impress young critics from different cultures in equal measure.
2014 – A crucial year for Afghanistan
Visiting Kabul today (9 February), Foreign Minister Steinmeier made it clear that Germany would support Afghanistan on its way to a future of its own choosing.
2014 is a crucial year for Afghanistan.
A new President will be elected in April, and the Afghan security forces are getting ready to assume complete responsibility for the country's security by the end of the year.
Following a meeting with Foreign Minister Zarar Osmani he said:
Afghanistan is a sovereign state and wants to take its future into its own hands.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and Afghanistan's President Karzai
Another item on the agenda was the signing of the bilateral security agreement between Afghanistan and the United States.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier also urged those he spoke with to continue the fight against corruption and the drug trade.
The country's future also required an intra-Afghan reconciliation process “including the Taliban”, Steinmeier said.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier after landing in Mazar-e-Sharif
2014 – A crucial year for Afghanistan
Speaking in Mazar-e-Sharif in the morning, Germany's Foreign Minister had already emphasised that this was a crucial year for Afghanistan.
For instance, the Minister said, Afghanistan was no longer regarded as “a training camp for Islamist terrorists”.
A street in Kabul
The international ISAF combat troops are due to have withdrawn completely from Afghanistan by 31 December 2014.
Minister of State Roth and Ambassador Gourdault-Montagne were received by the Secretaries-General of the Franco-German Youth Office, Markus Ingenlath and Béatrice Angrand.
Training of Afghan National Security Forces
Germany too is prepared to shoulder responsibility and to provide between 600 and 800 soldiers for the advisory and training mission for an initial period of two years.
This mission needs to be approved by the German Bundestag.
But the right conditions need to be in place in Afghanistan as well: among other things, the Afghan Government must issue a formal invitation and a status of forces agreement must be concluded between NATO and Afghanistan.
A bilateral security agreement between Afghanistan and the United States recommended by the Loya Jirga has not as yet been signed by President Karzai.
Germany not only provides the third-largest troop contingent in Afghanistan, but is also the third-largest donor for civilian reconstruction in the country.
Through its civilian engagement, Germany is supporting local reconstruction efforts by state and non-state entities.
The creation of sustainable structures is a particular focus.
The German Consulate-General in Mazar-e-Sharif, which opened in June 2013, plays a key role in coordinating our support.
Germany's involvement in northern Afghanistan
What next in Afghanistan?
Foreign Minister Steinmeier was in Rome on Friday for his first talks there since taking office.
The discussions focused primarily on bilateral and European cooperation, alongside current international issues.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and Prime Minister Letta
As part of a series of first official visits to Germany’s partners in Europe, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier travelled to Italy on Friday (7 February) for political talks.
Alongside a meeting with President Giorgio Napolitano, he spoke to Prime Minister Enrico Letta
and engaged in indepth consultations with Foreign Minister Emma Bonino.
These discussions with Italy’s leaders focused on European and bilateral issues as well as the international agenda.
I am quite convinced that Europe cannot be strong unless Italy is strong.
“I have confidence in Italy”
Turning to Italy’s upcoming assumption of the Presidency of the EU Council for the second half of 2014, Foreign Minister Steinmeier said he was delighted that Italy intended to make the political future of Europe a feature of its term in office.
Steinmeier assured his Italian counterpart of Germany’s support in this matter, saying
“this is precisely the topic Europe needs at this time”.
In an interview with the Italian daily Corriere della sera shortly before his trip, Foreign Minister Steinmeier emphasised the confidence he had in our Italian partners and urged Italy’s leaders to keep up their reform efforts.
The full interview with Corriere della sera is available here.
Steinmeier and Bonino at their joint press conference
Exchange of views on the international agenda
In an extensive conversation with Italy’s Foreign Minister Bonino, the spotlight was on the current conflict situation in Syria and the efforts being undertaken for peace in the Middle East, as well as the negotiations with Iran and the crisis in Ukraine.
Steinmeier and Bonino made extended statements at the press conference held afterwards.
On the subject of the conflict in Ukraine, the German Foreign Minister said in Rome that it constituted “the return of violence to Europe”.
Both he and Foreign Minister Bonino said they were glad a cautious political process was now under way.
“for those involved in Ukraine, the hardest part of the road is yet to come” – namely finding a new balance between presidential and government powers.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier today (9 February) visited Afghanistan to assure the country of Germany's continued support even after the changes coming up there in 2014.
He stressed that the Afghan side would have to put in place the necessary conditions: for example, it was vital that Afghanistan sign the bilateral security agreement soon.
Colleagues meet: Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Osmani
During his first trip to Afghanistan in his second term in office, Foreign Minister Steinmeier emphasised to the Afghan side that Germany was prepared to continue its engagement beyond 2014.
Germany will support Afghanistan on its way to a future of its own choosing.
During his meeting with President Hamid Karzai, Foreign Minister Steinmeier stressed that it was necessary to sign the agreement soon, saying:
For us it is vital that the bilateral security agreement be signed soon.
This is important for the planning process and also in order to persuade the German public and parliament of the rightness of the operation.
It was also, he went on, a turning-point for international and therefore also German engagement in the Central Asian country.
We will feel an obligation to help as far as we can to secure everything that has been started here in the last 12 years or so.
When we look back, we can say that we're not where we saw ourselves over 12 years ago; we haven't achieved everything we wanted to, but we should not underestimate what has in fact been achieved.
Many children – including girls – were now able to attend school regularly again; there was basic health care and agricultural products were again being cultivated for the people to eat.
Steinmeier said 2014 was a turning-point because it was a matter of consolidating these successes.
Security responsibility will gradually be handed over to Afghan security forces up until that date.
Already the Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF) are responsible for around 80 percent of the population of Afghanistan.
The current Externer Link, öffnet in neuem FensterGerman Government progress report points to positive developments in the transfer of security responsibility, while at the same time highlighting the still difficult security situation in Afghanistan.
The international community intends to continue to assist the Afghan security forces after 2014 by providing training, advice and support within the framework of NATO’s Resolute Support mission.
Close cooperation with Afghan security agencies
This security agreement is, however, a precondition for US participation in the NATO mission and thus for the realisation of the mission at all.
Civilian engagement
In northern Afghanistan, for example, Germany is supporting the building of hospitals, health centres, schools, roads and police stations.
German police advisers are helping to rebuild the Afghan police force.
Further information on German support post-2014
German Government's progress report on Afghanistan (5 February 2014)
With regard to the conflict in Syria, Steinmeier and Bonino expressed the hope that progress might be made in the second round of talks in Geneva, where representatives of the Assad regime and the Syrian Opposition are to convene from 10 February.
Steinmeier added, however, that Foreign Ministers tended towards the “modest” in their hopes for successes in the face of such conflicts.
The important thing, he said, was to agree at least local ceasefires and enable access for humanitarian organisations.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier described the developments surrounding the nuclear dispute with Iran as “a ray of light in recent days” on the international plain.
An interim step had been taken, he explained, which had made a reduction in tensions possible after 10 years of negotiations.
He averred that this would hopefully open the door to a conclusive solution.
Coffee in Rome’s old town
Preparations for the next bilateral meeting
As befits the close relations between the two countries, the next German-Italian intergovernmental consultations will be taking place on 17 March.
Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Bonino therefore used their meeting on 7 February to carry out some more preparations for that high-level event.
The discussions concentrated both on the long-standing good relations between the two countries and on the current European agenda.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier went on to say, however, that
Disarmament and arms control
Talks centre on Syria, Ukraine and Switzerland
The Ministers also discussed the security situation in Libya and the Swiss referendum on curbing immigration.
Hunger is not a permissible weapon
Immediately upon arriving at the Council building in Brussels, Steinmeier stressed in his opening statement that the agenda of the Foreign Affairs Council was dominated by events in the Middle East.
He noted that the second round of the Syrian peace talks was starting today in Geneva.
For this reason, two things now have to be agreed at international level,
We cannot condone the use of hunger as a weapon in this conflict. This is a stance that will be clearly restated at the negotiations in Geneva.
Playing for time is not the way forward
The EU Foreign Ministers reiterated their readiness to facilitate dialogue between the Government and Opposition in Kyiv.
Preparations for the Year of German Language in Russia
Their discussion focused on the preparations for the Year of German Language and Literature in Russia.
Minister of State Böhmer receives the Russian President’s Special Representative for International Cultural Cooperation
Today (10 February), Minister of State Böhmer received the Russian President’s Special Representative for International Cultural Cooperation, Mikhail Shvydkoi, for a discussion at the Federal Foreign Office.
The Minister of State stressed the importance of language learning in enhancing cooperation between Germany and Russia.
The more young Germans and Russians that learned the other country’s language, the wider the basis would be for mutual understanding and cooperation, Böhmer emphasised.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier called for talks on amending the constitution in Ukraine.
But he noted that the Opposition would not be satisfied with empty words:
The demonstrations at the weekend have shown that
the Ukrainian people will not be satisfied with unsound compromises.
They have also shown that playing for time, the strategy once again being adopted by President Yanukovych, is not the way forward to a political solution.
The talks were organised in order to prepare for the Year of German Language and Literature in Russia, which is set to start in the summer.
The EU Foreign Ministers also spontaneously discussed the consequences of the Swiss referendum on curbing immigration.
"We want our relations with non-member countries such as Switzerland to be fair, and that means being willing to absorb the benefits of such a relationship as well as any disadvantages that might be incurred."
He further said that the institutional relationship between the EU and Switzerland would have to be reviewed and potentially put on a new contractual footing.
Council conclusions on Iraq PDF | 78 KB
Council conclusions on Tunisia PDF | 75 KB
Council conclusions on Yemen PDF | 77 KB
Council conclusions on the Central African Republic (in French) PDF | 86 KB
Steinmeier noted that since Switzerland is not an EU member state, the EU has to accept decisions taken independently by a majority of the Swiss population.
However, he felt that the vote did more harm to Switzerland than to anyone else, since it damaged its "reputation as a welcoming country at the heart of Europe" and because the Swiss economy depended on skilled immigrants.
Steinmeier attends EU Foreign Affairs Council:
Key items on the agenda for the 28 EU Foreign Ministers included the situation in Ukraine, the new round of peace talks on Syria, and the conflict in the Central African Republic.
In his opinion it was a success that the two Syrian delegations – the Government delegation and the Opposition delegation – had both come back to Geneva for the talks.
However, he stressed that progress also had to be made this time, especially with regard to the humanitarian situation.
The pictures from Homs showed that local agreements obviously did not work – something Steinmeier reiterated at a later press conference in Brussels.
specifically local ceasefires and access for humanitarian agencies – to help get basic necessities through to the desperate civilian population.
Ukraine was also high on the agenda at the meeting of the 28 EU Foreign Ministers.
EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs Catherine Ashton said the EU was ready to provide economic support within the framework of the reforms that are needed to avert the country’s bankruptcy.
The EU High Representative should, he said, continue her efforts on behalf of the EU to get talks between the Government and Opposition started.
The situation in Ukraine will also be a key issue during Steinmeier’s visit to Moscow later this week.
Switzerland is gambling away its reputation as a welcoming country
Steinmeier with fellow Foreign Ministers Lajčák, Corlăţean and Hague in Brussels
He stressed that cherry-picking was not a viable long‑term strategy for Swiss‑EU relations.
Human rights and humanitarian aid – as Federal Government Commissioner, Christoph Strässer is committed to these issues.
It is in Germany’s own best interest to help make universal respect for human rights a reality. Enduring peaceful relations are achieved only through stabile states, and there can be no long-term stability unless basic human rights are respected.
Since 29 January 2014 the post has been held by Christoph Strässer.
The Commissioner devotes a great deal of time to such consultations as well as to the meetings of the UN’s Human Rights Council in Geneva, where he heads the German delegation.
Mobilising civil society
In addition to the courts, Germany has a whole range of government and non-government bodies and organisations working to protect human rights.
Our commitment to provide humanitarian aid is, like human rights advocacy, an important dimension of German foreign policy and reflects the affirmation of human dignity enshrined in our constitution.
Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid
Protecting human rights and promoting universal respect for them is a cornerstone of German foreign policy.
This was the rationale for the establishment in November 1998 of the post of Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid at the Federal Foreign Office.
Minister of State Böhmer received the Russian President’s Special Representative for International Cultural Cooperation, Mikhail Shvydkoi, on 10 February.
Böhmer and Shvydkoi
Coordinator for Intersocietal Cooperation with Russia, the Eastern Partnership Countries and Central Asia
Since January 2014, Gernot Erler has been Coordinator for Intersocietal Cooperation with Russia, the Eastern Partnership Countries and Central Asia.
Part of the message read as follows:
Strengthening intersocietal dialogue
I would like to convey to you, the victims’ families and the Algerian people my heartfelt sympathy following this terrible tragedy.
Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid on Red Hand Day
The Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid at the Federal Foreign Office, Christoph Strässer, issued the following statement on the occasion of Red Hand Day (12 February 2014):
In situations of armed conflict it is the children who suffer most: from death, hunger, injuries or recruitment as child soldiers, from attacks on their homes and schools or the loss of their loved ones.
I sincerely hope that the international community will use this day as an opportunity to draw attention to the fate of child soldiers worldwide, who still number more than 250,000.
Although we have achieved a great deal in recent years, we need to take even more decisive action.
We must not shirk this responsibility.
For it goes without saying that we cannot remain silent while children are forced to kill others.
Federal Foreign Minister Steinmeier expresses his condolences following the plane crash in Algeria
In response to today’s accident involving an Algerian military aircraft, Federal Foreign Minister Frank‑Walter Steinmeier sent a letter of condolence to his Algerian counterpart, Ramtane Lamamra.
I was very shocked to hear the news of the military plane crash in north‑eastern Algeria.
Bild: Gernot Erler, Coordinator for Intersocietal Cooperation with Russia, Central Asia and the Eastern Partnership Countries
That is why the Federal Government is campaigning strongly for the protection and promotion of children’s rights.
Germany has intensive relations with Russia, the five Central Asian republics, Ukraine, the three Southern Caucasus republics, Moldova and Belarus and is very keen to see this major region east of the EU flourish and enjoy stable development.
Through various projects we are enabling traumatised children to return to a safe way of life and to enjoy a normal childhood again.
Children’s rights
Background:
The idea of Red Hand Day originated in Germany.
The red hand symbol was adopted by an international alliance of NGOs known as the “Coalition to stop the use of child soldiers”.
It is also a day when children show solidarity towards other children.
However, regional cooperation is not working everywhere and there are tensions, crisis situations – such as the current one in Ukraine – and unresolved frozen conflicts.
The Coordinator’s task is to intensify intersocietal dialogue, thus laying the groundwork for official policy, and to use it to serve Germany’s stated political objectives.
This includes efforts to support and give substance to the key EU programmes in this region (Eastern Partnership, Strategy for Central Asia, Black Sea Synergy), whose main purpose is to defuse and resolve problems and conflicts through regional cooperation.
Red Hand Day is a special opportunity to take a joint stand with civil society against the deployment of child soldiers.
Germany and Italy are close partners and two of the founding members of the European Union.
It is a good example of civil society involvement.
I would like to express my sincere thanks to all participants for this most important work!
Following their meeting, the two Ministers gave a joint press conference.
The Protocol stipulated that young people under the age of eighteen may not be compulsorily recruited into a country’s armed forces.
Germany ratified the Optional Protocol on 13 December 2004.
And to taste a bit of the Italian lifestyle with a real espresso. After all, when in Rome...
Active and pro-reform civil societies are making themselves heard ever more frequently in all 12 countries, and we want to be a good partner to them.
Strategic Partnership
Germany and Russia share a centuries-old history which has often been difficult.
Today the two countries are linked by a strategic partnership.
They depend on each another when it comes to dealing with key international issues.
Kremlin wall at night
German-Russian relations consist of several elements:
intensive and frank political consultations,
close economic relations,
cultural and academic exchange and
civil society dialogue, which since 2001 has included the Petersburg Dialogue.
The strategic partnership with Russia must be put on a more sustainable footing in order to cope with the challenges of globalisation.
Germany and Russia have therefore agreed on a Modernisation Partnership to intensify their cooperation in key spheres such as the law, health policy and demography, energy efficiency, transport infrastructure, as well as basic and further training.
One focus of the Modernisation Partnership is legal cooperation.
It is aimed at strengthening democratic and market economy institutions with the support of civil society.
Bedrock of common interests
Germany works closely with Russia on a wide range of regional and global issues.
We are keen, too, for it to be an active player in multilateral institutions (G8, OSCE, Council of Europe, NATO-Russia Council, EU-Russian cooperation, OECD, WTO).
On specific issues we may, of course, have different interests.
However, the two countries are seeking to ensure the greatest possible degree of consultation and transparency.
The Russian human rights activist Lyudmila Mikhaylovna Alekseyeva was a founding member of the Moscow Helsinki Group in 1976.
A frank exchange on the human rights situation in Russia is part and parcel of the strategic partnership.
Russia’s constitution of 1993 formally guarantees all human rights and civil liberties, and its leaders regularly reaffirm their commitment to them.
However, Russian and international human rights defenders report of flaws in the practical enforcement of codified rights.
Germany conducts a frank dialogue with Russia – also about human rights issues, corruption and shortcomings in the sphere of the rule of law.
These issues also play a vital role in the exchange between the two civil societies.
Regular consultations
There is an intensive dialogue between the governments in which unresolved issues are discussed in a frank and constructive spirit.
Intergovernmental consultations held alternately in Russia and Germany are an annual fixture. The most recent took place in Moscow on 16 November 2012.
The Foreign Ministers and other ministers meet regularly both at bilateral level and in multinational fora.
The economic sector plays a key role in bilateral relations.
Germany is Russia’s number one partner in this field and Russia our leading energy supplier.
Economic exchange and increasing economic ties not only serve to boost long-term growth in both countries but also contribute to stable political relations and promote technological progress.
Looking ahead, it is up to Russian and German business to intensify cooperation still further.
For Western investors interested in expanding their operations in Russia much will depend on how they see the country developing over the next few years, especially as regards legal certainty.
Russia will be even more closely integrated into the global economy following its accession to WTO in summer 2012.
Coordinator for Intersocietal Cooperation with Russia, Central Asia and the Eastern Partnership Countries
Civil society cooperation is one of the crucial pillars of German foreign policy.
Each year on Red Hand Day we remember the child soldiers who year after year suffer the consequences of the many violent conflicts in the world.
This day of action is intended to be a reminder of the entry into force of the Optional Protocol to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict on 12 February 2002 and is dedicated to protesting against the use of child soldiers.
The task of the Coordinator is to intensify intersocietal dialogue with Russia, Central Asia and the Eastern Partnership countries, thus laying the groundwork for official policy, and to use it to serve Germany’s foreign policy objectives.
This also includes work to support the key EU programmes in this region (Eastern Partnership, Strategy for Central Asia, Black Sea Synergy).
Active and pro-reform civil societies are making themselves heard ever more frequently in all 12 countries, and Germany wants to be a good partner to them.
Former Minister of State Gernot Erler has held this office since January 2014.
The European Union and Russia
Russia is one of the EU’s strategic partners.
Relations are close and multifaceted and are to be further enhanced with the conclusion of a new agreement.
Russia is one of the EU’s strategic partners; the two sides are united by a comprehensive modernisation partnership.
A broader “New Agreement” is currently being negotiated to replace the existing Partnership and Cooperation Agreement.
Relations between the EU and Russia are close and cover all major fields.
The aim of both German and European foreign policy is to further deepen and shape this “strategic partnership”.
However, the PCA no longer fully represents the current state of relations.
So it is to be replaced by a new, comprehensive framework agreement which has acquired the working title “New Agreement” during the negotiating process.
The talks are already well advanced, but precisely because it is such an important agreement, both sides prefer to be careful rather than hasty.
These cover (a) the Common Economic Space, (b) cooperation in the areas of freedom, security and justice, (c) external security and (d) research, education and culture.
Regular meetings make for progress in cooperation
International issues of interest to both sides are discussed and new initiatives launched, such as the modernisation partnership between the EU and Russia in 2010.
This partnership is intended to strengthen cooperation on economic and infrastructure modernisation projects, but also on rule of law, political and civil society questions.
These include disarmament and arms control, international trouble spots such as Syria, Afghanistan, Iran and the Middle East, as well as global challenges such as energy security, climate change and the fight against organised crime.
At Summits, too, we do not shy away from these sometimes controversial issues.
It is the EU’s conviction that progress can only be made through constant, constructive dialogue.
Visa facilitations
These regulate matters such as exemptions from visa requirements or simplified procedures for visa applications by specific groups of persons from the Schengen States and Russia.
A more comprehensive visa facilitation and readmission agreement is currently being negotiated.
In the long term, both the EU and Russia are hoping to drop visa requirements altogether in order to further promote interpersonal contacts.
At the end of 2011, the two sides agreed on a list of “common steps” to this end.
These relate above all to immigration and security policy matters.
Trade relations
The EU is Russia’s most important trading partner by far.
Roughly half of Russia’s entire volume of foreign trade is trade with the EU.
Trade relations in the energy sector are especially important for both sides: about 20 percent of the EU’s oil needs and around 45 percent of its gas requirements are met by Russia, and the trend is upwards.
The EU’s main exports to Russia are machinery and transport equipment, chemicals, agricultural products and textiles.
Belarus, Kazakhstan and Russia belong to the Eurasian Customs Union.
Following Russia’s accession to the WTO in 2012, we can expect trade relations between the EU and Russia to be given fresh impetus, in view of the obligation to eliminate trade barriers.
This app is designed for use on android smartphones and tablets as well as iPhones and iPads.
Political talks and a taste of the Italian lifestyle
During Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s first official visit to Rome since taking office, the talks focused above all on cooperation on European policy as well as on bilateral issues.
So their shared commitment to Europe was one of the key points on the agenda during Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s first official visit to Rome since taking office.
In Rome, he met members of the Italian leadership around President Napolitano and Prime Minister Letta.
He also had a friendly and intensive exchange with Foreign Minister Bonino.
“I am delighted that we can start to work together to further the good relations between Italy and Germany.
I am quite convinced that Europe cannot be strong unless Italy is strong.”
The talks between Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Bonino also highlighted questions relating to the future of Europe.
“We have to expand the debate about Europe.
We have to think beyond the day when we have overcome Europe’s economic crisis and regained stability. At that point, this Europe will need a political future.
And we are not well enough prepared for that.”
The debate about the future of Europe will also be a key feature of the Italian EU Presidency in the second half of the year.
Steinmeier’s brief visit to Rome did allow him time to take a short walk through the narrow streets of the Eternal City.
Sicher reisen – your travel app
In this one app, the Federal Foreign Office has brought together all the information you will need for a safe trip abroad that goes as smoothly as it possibly can.
You will find tips on preparing for your travels and coping with any emergencies, and it also provides the addresses of Germany’s missions abroad and of the embassies and consulates in Germany which represent the countries you are heading for.
Since 1997 relations have in practice been based on the “Partnership and Cooperation Agreement” (PCA) which sets out, among other things, when and which EU and Russian ministers are to meet in “Permanent Partnership Councils” and what priorities should be fixed in economic and cultural relations.
Negotiations on this ambitious document have been going on since 2008. It is intended to create a comprehensive, reliable, long-term basis for political, economic, trade, scientific and cultural relations.
At the EU-Russia Summit in May 2005, building on the PCA, the “Four Common Spaces” were adopted.
Specific cooperation projects were agreed for these areas and are being implemented on a step-by-step basis.
EU-Russia Summits normally take place twice a year. The two sides last convened in Brussels in January 2014.
Coordinators on both sides develop concrete projects to this end, sometimes picking up on the experiences of individual member states – particularly Germany, which has had this kind of partnership with Russia since 2008.
The EU is also in regular dialogue with Russia on the difficult issues of human rights and the rule of law, conducting biannual EU-Russia human rights consultations. These cover topics such as freedom of opinion and assembly, freedom of the media, relevant pieces of draft legislation, human rights protection in connection with combating terrorism, torture and abuse, respect for the rule of law and the situation in the Northern Caucasus, as well as cooperation in UN bodies and in the Council of Europe, including the reform of the European Court of Human Rights.
A Visa Facilitation Agreement and a Readmission Agreement have been in force between the EU and Russia since June 2007.
Red Hand Day:
A red hand protest against the use of child soldiers
For many children, a peaceful childhood is only a dream.
The day of action known as Red Hand Day was launched two years later.
We cannot remain silent while children are forced to kill others
He went on to say that, although we had achieved a great deal in recent years, even more decisive action was needed.
Speaking on Red Hand Day this year, he said, “It goes without saying that we cannot remain silent while children are forced to kill others.”
That, he explained, was why the Federal Government was campaigning strongly for the protection and promotion of children’s rights.
Strässer pointed to the various projects through which Germany was helping enable traumatised children to return to a safe way of life and to enjoy a normal childhood again.
He continued:
“We are promoting support and education programmes, therapy and public relations work in connection with the issue of children’s rights and engaging in political dialogue with conflict parties, both in the world’s trouble spots and here at home.”
The Human Rights Commissioner commended the committed work being undertaken at civil society level to protect children.
He described Red Hand Day as a special opportunity to take a joint stand with civil society against the deployment of child soldiers.
The Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in armed conflict supplements the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Among other things, the Protocol stipulates that young people under the age of eighteen may not be compulsorily recruited into a country’s armed forces.
Germany ratified the Optional Protocol in 2004 and has been working hard since then to ensure its implementation.
More information about the day of action is available here: www.redhandday.org
a joint stand against the use of child soldiers
Children are used as soldiers in armed conflict in many parts of the world.
Each year on 12 February, Red Hand Day seeks to raise awareness of their situation.
It was on 12 February 2002, twelve years ago today, that the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict entered into force.
The red hand is used a symbol to say no to the recruitment and use of child soldiers.
According to United Nations estimates, about 250,000 children around the world are being deployed as soldiers in conflict zones.
It has been ratified by 140 countries to date.
“Each year on Red Hand Day we remember the child soldiers who (...) suffer the consequences of the many violent conflicts in the world,” as Federal Government Human Rights Commissioner Christoph Strässer put it.
German makes friends
More on cultural relations and education policy
Cultural and educational programmes tailored to the needs and interests of people in our partner countries not only create a broad basis for stable international relations
Germany and Russia are very important economic partners to one another.
Cooperation in economic affairs and energy
Energy plays a special role in the two countries’ collaboration, Russia being Germany’s leading energy supplier.
Germany and Russia are very important economic partners to one another.
Energy plays a special role in economic relations between the two countries, Russia being Germany’s leading energy supplier.
If ties between the European and Russian economies are to continue growing closer, much will depend on how Russia develops over the next few years, especially as regards legal certainty and modernisation of the economy.
A refinery in Chayvo, Russia
2011 and 2012 saw some big increases in trade between Germany and Russia.
The volume of bilateral trade grew by 29% in 2011, reaching 75 billion euros.
Another rise of 7% in 2012 brought it to 80.5 billion euros.
This made Germany Russia’s third-most important trading partner in the world, after China and the Netherlands.
The positive trend could not continue in 2013, however, due to the dampened levels of economic development in Russia.
The volume of bilateral trade between January and October 2013 was 5% lower than the same period in the previous year, while imports from Russia sank by 7% and German exports saw a 4% reduction.
Russia mainly exports fuels (oil and gas) and raw materials (especially metals) to Germany.
In the other direction, German companies mainly export capital goods, machinery, vehicles, chemical products, electronic products and foodstuffs to Russia.
German companies invested around 12 billion US dollars in the Russian Federation during the first ten months of 2013.
A key bilateral forum for discussing economic and financial issues is the Strategic Working Group, made up of representatives from government and industry.
This working group, which last met in Berlin in July 2013, concentrates on specific cooperation projects in key areas of the two economies, such as aerospace, information and communications technology, financial services, construction, transport and infrastructure, car manufacturing, housing and health.
The working group also addresses energy issues such as oil/gas, electricity, coal, renewable energy sources and energy efficiency.
Russia has been a member of the World Trade Organization (WTO) since August 2012.
Membership of the WTO involves an obligation to comprehensively dismantle barriers to trade.
Russia is seeking membership of the OECD.
Energy security
through the teaching of German, information on study programmes and career prospects in Germany, active cultural affairs work and cooperative projects involving universities and research institutions.
Germany, Great Britain and Europe
Minister of State Roth receives British MPs
On 12 February, Foreign Minister Steinmeier met his counterpart from Togo for talks in Berlin.
Developing German-British relations was the focus of the talks with the members of parliament.
In addition to this, they had a in-depth exchange of opinions on different views on Europe and the European Union.
Russia is the world’s largest producer of oil and second only to the United States in its gas production.
Minister of State Roth received a delegation of British MPs at the Federal Foreign Office today (12 February).
In their talks in Berlin on Wednesday (12 February), however, the two Foreign Ministers focused on present opportunities and challenges.
There was a “strong willingness” in Togo to continue along the path towards democracy, Foreign Minister Steinmeier emphasised following his meeting with Dussey.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier welcomes Robert Dussey, his counterpart from Togo
Dussey stated that Germany could count on Togo as a partner and a “country wishing to pursue reform”.
Germany has a strong interest in a stable and democratic Togo.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier commented on the country’s neighbourhood, which “lacked security sometimes”, and praised Togo’s engagement in Mali.
It possesses considerable reserves of oil, gas and coal.
Togo plays an active part in the UN mission MINUSMA.
The EU is by far the most significant market for Russian energy exports, with Germany drawing almost 40% of its crude oil and gas imports from Russia.
Togo’s political development, the unstable security situation in Mali and the fight against piracy in the Gulf of Guinea were some of the topics discussed during Robert Dussey’s first official visit to Berlin.
Before the press conference
During their joint press conference, Foreign Minister Steinmeier stressed once more that Africa must not only be seen as a “continent of crises”.
The second of its two parallel lines was inaugurated at the end of 2012.
Plans to construct third and fourth lines are under consideration.
At nearly one third of industrial production, energy is the largest sector of the Russian economy.
It generates about a quarter of GDP and half the country’s export volume. Through duties, taxes and tariffs it accounts for around 50% of federal revenues.
At the same time he welcomed support from the international community.
The Baltic Sea pipeline
Click here for more information on relations between Germany and Togo
Development aid to help people help themselves
From the German point of view, institutional and constitutional reforms in Togo are particularly important.
Togo’s Foreign Minister Dussey visits Berlin
The two Foreign Ministers know each other from Steinmeier’s first term of office, when he visited Togo’s capital Lomé in 2008.
He said that the two Ministers had agreed to identify specific areas in which Germany could help Togo achieve its reform goals.
It plays an important role in diversifying oil supply routes to Europe.
The connection of other countries to this pipeline is also planned.
Energy efficiency and climate protection
Generating electricity with solar cells
Russian energy policy envisages considerable improvements in energy efficiency.
There are several reasons for this. The Russian economy is very energy-intensive,
with the industrial sector consuming comparatively high amounts of energy in proportion to what it produces.
It is true that Russia, with emissions still far below 1990 levels, is still fulfilling its obligations under the Kyoto Protocol, which it ratified in 2004. Economic growth, however, could bring it up to the limits defined in the Protocol.
Another good reason for Russia to enhance its energy efficiency is that using up less energy itself would leave it with new potential for export.
This means that German companies, renowned as world leaders in energy-saving technology, find themselves in demand in Russia.
Garnering support for Germany’s culture of welcome
Minister of State Böhmer presented the new report on cultural relations and education policy today.
Communicating Germany’s culture of welcome to the wider world
Maria Böhmer, Minister of State at the Federal Foreign Office, presented the 2012/2013 report on cultural relations and education policy during today’s question-and-answer session in the Bundestag.
Minister of State Maria Böhmer
When presenting the report on cultural relations and education policy in the German Bundestag, Minister of State Böhmer in particular focused on Germany’s image abroad and the “culture of welcome” issue.
Böhmer underlined that while Germany had made great progress in this area in the last few years intensified efforts were still needed to communicate this to the wider world.
She stated that the culture of welcome must start abroad:
Minister of State Böhmer went on to say:
In my previous capacity as Federal Government Commissioner for Migration, Refugees and Integration I was guided by the principle ’Talk to rather than talk about one another!’
For eight years as Minister of State at the Federal Foreign Office I want to help use this dialogue principle, which is firmly rooted in cultural relations and education policy, to further improve Germany’s image throughout the world and to show that particularly the culture of welcome in our country is better than its reputation.
The Minister of State added that cultural relations and education policy could play a more active role in this area,
for the Federal Government has set itself the goal of encouraging up to 350,000 foreign students by the end of this decade – over a third more than hitherto – to study in Germany and thus help reduce the shortage of skilled workers in our country.
The Federal Government’s 17th Report on Cultural Relations and Education Policy
Along with political and economic relations, cultural relations and education policy is one of the three pillars of German foreign policy and has, moreover, a demonstrably long-term impact.
but also build trust in our country around the world. As a result of such programmes, our civil society, business and political players readily find a host of important and reliable partners to work with.
Culture and intercultural dialogue
Bilateral relations are informed by the era of Germany’s colonial presence in Togo (1884-1914), which established a strong historical link between the two countries.
According to Foreign Minister Steinmeier, relations between Germany and Togo were “highly topical” thanks to intergovernmental and personal ties.
A willingness to pursue reform and democracy
“We have to take the road towards a democratic regime”, Dussey confirmed at their joint press conference at the Federal Foreign Office.
He continued to say that this included the necessary constitutional reforms the two Ministers had intensively discussed.
Dealing with trouble spots in the region a key issue
Togo helped to make the country safer “in collaboration with other African armed forces”, Steinmeier said.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier also welcomed Togo’s involvement in the fight against piracy in the Gulf of Guinea and the country’s maritime cooperation in this context with other neighbouring states.
Dussey expressed his hope that more business investment would be forthcoming from Germany.
Dussey said he was convinced that Africa’s development depended ultimately on the African people.
German companies are heavily involved in the energy sector in Russia.
The Nord Stream (or Baltic Sea) pipeline, which began operations in November 2011, has opened up a new supply route for transporting natural gas from Russia to Europe.
The Baltic Sea pipeline is a joint project being undertaken by Russian, German and other European businesses.
When it was inaugurated in November 2011, the pipeline opened up a new supply route for transporting natural gas from Russia to Germany.
I call upon the Iranian leadership to finally end the house arrest of former presidential candidates Karroubi and Moussavi.
These house arrests are not based on any charge or verdict.
Iran has entered into international obligations to respect civil and political rights.
President Rouhani must follow up his announcement that he will grant more civil liberties with deeds and launch bold reforms.
While some prisoners were released, including human rights lawyer Nasrin Sotoudeh, numerous opposition members are still in detention.
Human rights policy
Human Rights Commissioner Strässer demands release of Iranian opposition leaders and bold reforms
The German-Russian Year
Logo of the Germany Year in Russia
For a whole year, Germany and Russia together hosted events under the slogan “Germany and Russia – shaping the future together” in the fields of culture, education, research, politics and business.
Further exciting projects are planned in the field of cultural relations.
Steinmeier travels to Moscow
Foreign Minister Steinmeier will be engaging in extensive talks with his Russian counterpart, Sergey Lavrov, on Thursday and Friday.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier is travelling to Moscow today (13 February) for a two-day visit.
The trip will centre around extensive political consultations with his opposite number in Russia, Sergey Lavrov.
The talks are to cover the whole gamut of issues that are currently of importance in German-Russian relations,
including not only the two countries’ bilateral relations and the relationship between Russia and the European Union, but also international matters such as the situations in Syria and Ukraine and nuclear talks with Iran.
In the run-up to his trip, Steinmeier spoke in favour of continuing to consolidate relations with Russia.
“We need Russia to solve nearly all security policy crises and conflicts of our time.”
“It cannot be done without Russia”
Steinmeier and Lavrov at the Munich Security Conference on 1 February 2014
The Bronze Age exhibits are reminders of a time long past when borders did not yet play a role in Europe.
The two Foreign Ministers will also discuss the situation in Ukraine.
Three years of house arrest for Karroubi and Moussavi:
Since 14 February 2011, Iranian opposition leaders Mehdi Karroubi and Mir Hossein Moussavi as well as Moussavi’s wife Zahra Rahnavard have been under house arrest.
Christoph Strässer, the Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid at the Federal Foreign Office, issued the following statement on this:
They are therefore devoid of any legal basis.
It must live up to these commitments.
On 14 February 2011, former presidential candidates Mehdi Karroubi and Mir Hossein Moussavi as well as Moussavi’s wife Zahra Rahnavard were placed under house arrest in Iran.
To date the Iranian judicial authorities have brought no formal charges against the three opposition figures.
The human rights situation remains critical even after the election of President Rouhani on 14 June 2013.
Despite President Rouhani’s promise that he will grant more civil liberties, repression and human rights violations in Iran continue.
As the talks between the Government and Opposition falter, Steinmeier is urging those involved to swiftly relaunch the search for a solution to the conflict.
Commenting on the situation last week during his meeting with Italian Foreign Minister Emma Bonino, he made it clear that the “hardest part of the road” was yet to come in Ukraine, namely finding a new balance between presidential and government powers.
Steinmeier and Lavrov intend to take plenty of time for their talks,
with a long dinner planned for this evening (Thursday) followed by extensive discussions among the delegates tomorrow.
“Not without Russia!” –
an article by Foreign Minister Steinmeier for Focus magazine (27 January 2014)
German-Russian relations
More information about the events and projects of the Germany Year can be found on the website of the Germany Year in Russia and the Russia Year in Germany:
Externer Link, öffnet in neuem Fensterhttp://www.germanyinrussia.ru/
In this way, too, the curators overcame national borders.
At the original opening in St Petersburg on 21 June 2013, Federal Chancellor Angela Merkel and President Vladimir Putin immediately announced the next "crossover" year.
St Basil’s Cathedral and the Kremlin
German-Belgian Conference:
Foreign Minister Steinmeier will receive Their Majesties King Philippe and Queen Mathilde of Belgium at the Federal Foreign Office in the afternoon of 17 February.
Belgium’s King and Queen to visit Berlin
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and his guests will take part in the closing event of the fourth German-Belgian Conference at the Federal Foreign Office.
You can follow the Conference on Twitter (#DeBeConf).
Please refer to the press information of the organiser, Europäische Bewegung Deutschland (European Movement Germany), for the complete Conference programme.
Press information (PDF, 135 KB), in German
The King and Queen will be accompanied by Belgian Prime Minister Elio Di Rupo and Foreign Minister Didier Reynders.
Minister of State for Europe Michael Roth will open the Conference at 9.45 a.m.
After that, participants will discuss the cross-cutting theme of the Conference, "Multifaceted neighbours with federal systems – what kind of Europe would Belgians and Germans like to see?", in various panels.
Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Reynders will address the Conference with their closing remarks at 3.45 p.m.
Alongside Prime Minister Lambertz of the German-speaking Community in Belgium, Regional Prime Minister Demotte of the Walloon Government and of the Government of the French Community, and Minister-President Peeters of the Flemish Government, the conference will be attended by European, Belgian and German parliamentarians and senior members of various universities and associations.
Interpretation of the entire Conference will be available in German, French and Dutch.
This summer will see the launch of a year of German language and literature  in Russia and a parallel year of Russian language and literature in Germany, both of which will run until the summer of 2015.
The Germany Year in the Russian Federation 2012/2013 notched up some impressive statistics: twelve months, over a thousand events in more than 50 Russian regions, countless thrilled visitors and a continuous flood of positive feedback from the public and the Russian media.
The exhibition "Bronze Age: Europe without Borders" in St Petersburg, which was opened by Federal Chancellor Angela Merkel and Russian President Vladimir Putin on 21 June 2013, was thus the crowning culmination of a unique year and also itself an illustration of our vibrant German-Russian partnership.
More than 1700 artefacts from the participating museums traced cultural, social and religious developments across Bronze Age Europe.
The exhibition was unusual in that it included numerous pieces of war-displaced cultural property which had not been seen in this form by the general public for the past 70 years.
Some 600 artefacts on display originated in Germany.
The fact that they were shown despite the ongoing legal disputes regarding the return of cultural property can be considered a special success.
Long years of hard work under the German-Russian Museums Dialogue finally bore tangible fruit with this cooperative project involving the State Hermitage Museum (St Petersburg), the State Historical Museum (Moscow), the Pushkin State Museum of Fine Arts (Moscow) and the Museum of Pre- and Early History as part of the National Museums in Berlin.
After closing in St Petersburg, the exhibition opened in the Moscow State Historical Museum on 15 October 2013 to great media and public acclaim, where it remained until 13 January 2014.
Steinmeier visits Russia
Foreign Minister Steinmeier is in Moscow, engaging in extensive talks with Russia’s Foreign Minister Lavrov and President Putin.
Extensive talks in Moscow
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier arrived in Moscow on Thursday (13 February) for a two-day visit.
The trip centres around extensive political consultations with his opposite number in Russia, Sergey Lavrov.
Steinmeier’s programme also includes meetings with President Putin and representatives of civil society.
Talks in the fireplace room:
Steinmeier and Lavrov
Steinmeier and Lavrov took plenty of time for their talks,
with Thursday evening’s long dinner, where the spotlight was on the situation in Ukraine, followed on Friday morning by more extensive discussions among the delegates.
The focus there was on such international issues as the situation in Syria and nuclear talks with Iran, as well as bilateral matters – both German-Russian relations and the relationship between Russia and the European Union.
In an interview given previously to the Russian daily Kommersant, Foreign Minister Steinmeier had spoken of his wish to work on a shared future with Russia:
Working on a “positive German-Russian agenda”
At a joint press conference with his opposite number, the German Foreign Minister highlighted the outstanding significance of German-Russian relations,
saying this represented both a responsibility and an obligation.
Despite the two countries’ “in some ways still divergent concepts of state and society”, he said, silence between Berlin and Moscow was not the answer. More dialogue was what the situation called for, he averred.
In my view, we mustn’t reduce our relations to our differences alone; we should highlight what we have in common more and work on a positive German-Russian agenda.
Press conference with Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Lavrov
In an article which appeared in Focus magazine at the time of the Munich Security Conference, the Foreign Minister stressed Germany’s reliance on cooperation with Russia, saying
“We need Russia to solve nearly all security policy crises and conflicts of our time.”
an interview with Foreign Minister Steinmeier for the Russian daily Kommersant (14 February 2013)
The German Foreign Minister stressed the need to use partnerships like the modernisation partnership in place between Russia and the EU to clarify differing perspectives and seek ways of bringing the different points of view closer together.
Examples he gave were exchanges for young people, shared universities and cooperation pertaining to the rule of law.
Steinmeier also reported that the two Foreign Ministers had spent a long time discussing the situation in Ukraine.
They were of one mind, he said, on the need for Russian and the EU to talk about long-term prospects in Europe in order to prevent any future crisis like the one gripping Ukraine.
He said that the crucial thing here was the “reciprocal pledge that each side would ensure greater transparency with regard to its own policy”.
not a geopolitical chess match
Above all, Steinmeier went on, Ukraine must not become a “geopolitical chess match”:
What goes on in Ukraine must not be about securing geopolitical spheres of influence.
We have to enable the people of Ukraine to choose freely which path they want to take in future.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier on the end of the Syria negotiations in Geneva
Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement in Berlin today (16 February) on the situation in Syria:
That even the third round of talks on Syria in Geneva has produced no results demonstrates once again that Assad and his people are not genuinely interested in the negotiations but simply want to protect their power.
The suffering of the Syrian people and the future of the country clearly play no role in this.
It is all the more urgent therefore that the United Nations Security Council acts now and adopts a resolution on the humanitarian situation in Syria which puts an end to the perpetration of war crimes.
Joint article by Minister of State Michael Roth and France’s Minister Delegate for European Affairs, Thierry Repentin.
During the last few years, Europe has experienced a serious economic and social crisis.
Unemployment, especially among young people, has reached an intolerable level in many countries.
Strengthening social cohesion in Europe
Foreign Minister Steinmeier has held extensive talks in Moscow with Foreign Minister Lavrov, President Putin and representatives of civil society.
The trip centred around extensive political consultations with his opposite number in Russia, Sergey Lavrov.
On the Friday (14 February), Steinmeier also met President Putin and representatives of civil society.
Fresh momentum for bilateral relations
On Friday afternoon, Foreign Minister Steinmeier had a meeting with President Putin.
Afterwards, Steinmeier emphasised the open and constructive nature of their talks on bilateral relations which, he said, “could do with some fresh momentum”.
There will be lots of opportunity for that over the coming weeks and months, which will see a whole series of bilateral meetings between Germany and Russia – including the bilateral intergovernmental consultations and meetings at the up-coming G8 summit.
All in all, as Steinmeier saw it, the important thing was to really make full use of the potential of German-Russian relations while at the same speaking openly about differing conceptions of civil rights and the rule of law.
Alongside bilateral relations, Steinmeier and Putin also discussed the situations in Ukraine and Syria.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier with representatives of civil society
This was followed by extensive talks between the German Foreign Minister and representatives of Russian civil society.
Steinmeier’s visit to Moscow highlighted his desire to continue consolidating Berlin and Moscow’s relations.
In an interview with the Russian daily Kommersant on Friday, the Foreign Minister spoke of his wish to work on a shared future with Russia:
Before departing on his trip, Foreign Minister stressed Germany’s reliance on cooperation with Russia in an article in the magazine Focus:
Third business forum on architecture, planning and construction
German skills for growing cities – that is the motto of the third business forum on architecture, planning and construction, to be held at the Federal Foreign Office in Berlin on 18 February 2014.
Federal Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier will open the event.
Around the world, urban structures are growing at breathtaking speed.
More than half of all people live in towns and cities.
There are major challenges to the infrastructure of growing cities,
as people need safe and affordable living space, proper transport routes, clean water and reliable energy supplies.
Just as importantly, they also need jobs and leisure areas within reach.
This business forum is intended to promote collaboration by German companies abroad and encourage architects, engineers and the construction industry to work even more closely with Germany’s promoters of foreign trade and investment.
Europe, a union based on solidarity
Populist movements are fanning the flames of fear.
We need a Europe which is stronger, more rooted in solidarity, more prosperous and fairer.
We will work to ensure the greatest possible economic and social convergence.
We will also encourage our European partners to introduce minimum wages, which will be set at national level.
“Working on a shared future with Russia”
During his visit to Moscow Federal Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier gave the following interview to the Russian newspaper Kommersant.
What is on the agenda during your visit to Russia?
For my first visit to Moscow since assuming office as German Foreign Minister, my main priority is to allow plenty of time.
To take the time we need to discuss current crises, but also to take the time to jointly reflect on fundamental issues.
What has changed in German-Russian relations since your last term as German Foreign Minister?
Has your view of Russia and Russian politics changed in the meantime?
Time has not stood still, neither in Germany, nor in Russia.
The major conflicts and crises have moved closer to home.
Yet my fundamental conviction remains unchanged –
nothing can be done without Russia.
Our countries are linked by far more than some media reports and public debates would sometimes have us believe.
I am interested in formulating political goals and implementing them through specific projects on the basis of these shared interests.
That is also the purpose of my talks in Moscow.
What are the main problems currently impairing relations between Moscow and Berlin?
At times we have a different view of foreign policy issues.
Published in the Frankfurter Rundschau on 17 February 2014.
Doubts are spreading.
As Ministers for Europe and Commissioners for Franco-German Cooperation, we will not accept this.
For the very opposite is true: Europe is one of the solutions, not the problem.
Solidarity is, in equal measure, an ideal and a value, a method and a policy.
We have to take decisive action in order to preserve what makes Europe unique: the inseparable combination of a union of shared values and a welfare state model.
For a long time, a social Europe was not much more than a subject for grandiose speeches.
This goal scarcely concealed the weaknesses in its implementation or those of the instruments available.
Today we have to find our way back to growth throughout Europe, a growth based on solidarity which leaves no-one behind.
The Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid issued the following statement today (17 February) on the subject of the Anti-Homosexuality Bill in Uganda:
We are working to achieve this through the pact of June 2012, which made growth and employment the focus of European action once more, through the banking union, which protects savers and makes banks take responsibility, through the inclusion of a social dimension in the economic and monetary union, through the agreement on the posting of workers, which creates a fair balance between economic freedom and fundamental social rights.
It is particularly shocking that he is basing his decision on the claim that homosexuality has spread in society because of social factors.
Human rights are indivisible.
Text for video on Foreign Minister in Moscow
Steinmeier in Moscow
We cannot afford to reduce our relations to the differences between us, instead, we should focus more on what we have in common.
He wants to devote plenty of time to political consultations.
In my view, we mustn’t reduce our relations to our differences alone; we should highlight what we have in common more.
The two Foreign Ministers also had an in-depth discussion on the situation in Ukraine.
In the coming months, we will have to advance further along this road.
What goes on in Ukraine must not be about securing geopolitical spheres of influence, the situation there is no geopolitical chess match, we have to enable the people of Ukraine to choose freely which path they want to take in future.
In the afternoon Steinmeier meets President Vladimir Putin in his residence.
Steinmeier took time for his discussions in Moscow.
Despite the two countries’ “in some ways still divergent concepts of state and society”, according to the Foreign Minister, silence between Berlin and Moscow was not the answer – rather the situation calls for intensive dialogue between the two capitals.
I call on President Museveni to revise his decision and not sign this bill into law.
The panel discussions will explore what
kind of Europe the Belgians and the Germans would like to see.
We will pay particular attention to ensuring that the social dimension does not become the poor relation of the European construction.
We need to be more ambitious when it comes to social cohesion.
Human dignity, freedom, democracy, equality, the rule of law and the universal nature of human rights are our shared values.
Senior politicians and other representatives from Germany and Belgium, as well as interested citizens, have come to Berlin today to attend the fourth bilateral conference on European affairs.
Any attack on them undermines Europeans’ confidence in their joint project and weakens the role model function which Europe has for its neighbourhood, to the east and to the south.
The Ugandan parliament passed the bill on 20 December 2013.
Minister of State Roth with Prime Ministers Lambertz and Demotte (right to left)
President Museveni previously refused to sign it into law but announced on 14 February 2014 that he now intended to sign after receiving reports from medical experts alleging that homosexuality was caused by social rather than genetic factors.
The people demonstrating in Kyiv’s Independence Square or risking their lives to cross the Mediterranean yearn to be part of Europe.
What particular contributions can the Germans and Belgians make to this project?
Our values give them cause for hope.
We want to revive Europe, to instil its citizens with renewed confidence and to make it possible for every generation to make a concrete contribution as committed Europeans to a better world.
For a better Europe
In a rousing speech, he made the case for a better Europe.
Europeans are still suffering from the consequences.
We have to strengthen and reinvigorate a Europe based on solidarity.
And, turning to the Belgian representatives, including Prime Ministers Karl-Heinz Lambertz (of the German speaking Community in Belgium), Rudy Demotte (of the Walloon Government and of the Government of the French Community), and Kris Peeters (of the Flemish Government), he stressed how much he valued exchange with his Belgian partners.
The Heads of State and Government have demonstrated their personal commitment to fighting the scourge of youth unemployment by creating a budget of six billion euros for 2014 and 2015 for this purpose.
Minister of State Roth underscored how vital it was for Europe to act as a whole in key areas such as the single currency, climate change and the financial markets.
In times of economic and social crises, there is a greater risk that the fundamental values on which European society is founded will be eroded.
For that we need a strong Europe.
The two Foreign Ministers have a private and confidential discussion in the fireplace room.
You only have to leave Europe to see in what high regard our shared values are held.
Roth called for a citizen-friendly Europe, in which problems were solved at the level at which they could best be dealt with.
The following day also promises a full programme for Steinmeier.
We are therefore also open to the idea of developing a political mechanism aimed at protecting our fundamental values within the EU more effectively without weakening existing instruments.
He meets Foreign Minister Lavrov once again to continue their discussions – this time together with their delegates.
Click here to read the Opening Address by Minister of State Roth at the fourth German-Belgian Conference in the Federal Foreign Office
Even the gold medals at the Olympic Games in Sochi get a look in – the Foreign Ministers mention them at the beginning of their joint press conference.
The Europe for which we both stand is a Europe of concrete solutions as well as a Europe which strengthens its values.
Discussions:
Steinmeier emphasises the great importance of bilateral relations and, despite all the differences between the two countries, calls for a “positive German-Russian agenda”.
The German Foreign Minister later tells journalists that they had had an open and constructive talk on bilateral relations, which “could do with some fresh momentum”.
This discussion is followed by a meeting with representatives from Russian civil society.
Federal systems, Europe and the young generation
The opening session was followed by a number of panel discussions.
The first half of the morning was devoted to a discussion on the federal systems in Germany and Belgium.
Minister of State Roth opening the #DeBeConf
All people have the right, anchored in law, to be protected from discrimination, persecution and violence irrespective of their sexual orientation and gender identity.
In Uganda, as in 79 countries around the world, homosexual acts are a punishable offence –
The afternoon discussions will focus above all on German-Belgian answers for Europe and on how European affairs can be made more democratic.
The latter debate will particularly take into account the views of the young generation on what Germany and Belgium can do to this end.
They will be received in the afternoon by Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier, who will attend the closing event of the conference with them.
Click here for the Conference programme.
The event will be held in the Europasaal at the Federal Foreign Office.
Human Rights Commissioner on the Anti-Homosexuality Bill in Uganda
I am utterly appalled that Uganda’s President Museveni is intending to sign into law a bill that would make homosexuality punishable by up to life in prison.
although no-one is known to have been sentenced for such offences in recent years.
A new Anti-Homosexuality Bill is now intended to increase the maximum sentence.
But you can take part in the discussion wherever you are, via social networks.
Follow the Conference in real time on Twitter using #DeBeConf.
Even before arriving, Foreign Minister Steinmeier makes it clear that during his two-day visit to the Russian capital he wants to focus on comprehensive dialogue.
After his arrival, first stop is the guest house of his Russian counterpart, Sergey Lavrov.
German-Russian relations are discussed, alongside international topics such as Iran, Syria and Ukraine.
Further discussion topics had been the situation in Ukraine and Syria.
#DeBeConf – 4th German-Belgian Conference
In his opening address, Minister of State Michael Roth called for “a better Europe”.
Multifaceted neighbours with federal systems – the 4th German-Belgian Conference in Berlin
This year, the focus will be on the two countries’ federal structures and German-Belgian ideas for the future of Europe.
What direction should the European project take, if we are to ensure that “more Europe” does not mean “less democracy”?
Are competences divided effectively and fairly between the EU and its member states?
These and many other questions are being examined at the German-Belgian Conference, which is this year being held at the Federal Foreign Office in Berlin.
Germany’s Minister of State for Europe Michael Roth opened the one-day conference this morning.
Together with the approximately 200 German and Belgian participants, the panellists focused on European policy issues from the German and Belgian perspectives.
The second half was spent examining the experiences of Germans in Belgium and Belgians in Germany.
Their Majesties King Philippe and Queen Mathilde of the Belgians are travelling to Berlin for this Conference.
The King and Queen will be accompanied by Belgian Prime Minister Elio Di Rupo and Foreign Minister Didier Reynders.
Your reactions and questions will be fed into the discussions in Berlin.
The high-level delegates in the Europasaal at the Federal Foreign Office took part in a lively debate:
the German-Belgian Conference focused on German-Belgian contributions for the future of Europe.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier with King Philippe and Queen Mathilde of the Belgians, in Berlin
King Philippe and Queen Mathilde of the Belgians lent a touch of glamour to the proceedings in the Federal Foreign Office's Europasaal as they attended the closing session of the Conference.
At a glance:
the conference programme
This time, too, the focus was on current European political issues.
And, turning to the Belgian representatives, including Prime Ministers Karl-Heinz Lambertz (of the German speaking Community in Belgium), Rudy Demotte (of the Walloon Government and of the Government of the French Community), and Kris Peeters (of the Flemish Government), he stressed how much he valued exchange with his Belgian partners.
Read more:
Opening Address by Minister of State Roth
The Conference continued with four panel discussions.
Together with the approximately 200 German and Belgian participants, the panellists focused above all on European policy issues from the German and Belgian perspectives.
The first half of the morning was thus devoted to a discussion on the federal systems in Germany and Belgium.
The prime idea in this context was to enhance diversity in Europe.
The participants in the discussion made it clear that people in Europe need their regional identities.
This debate was followed by a further discussion which focused on the young generation and the challenge of promoting more democracy in European affairs.
The event was held in the Europasaal at the Federal Foreign Office.
But people from outside were also able to take part in the discussion via social networks.
The Conference could be followed in real time on Twitter using #DeBeConf.
Various reactions and questions were thus also fed into the discussions in Berlin.
Europe as a work in progress
Foreign Minister Steinmeier closes #DeBeConf
In his closing remarks, Foreign Minister Steinmeier spoke about the future of Europe a hundred years after the outbreak of World War I:
We have no cause in 2014 to rest on our laurels.
But we have the means, the people, the ideas, to finish this work
Of that I am convinced!
The European dream of peace, freedom and social cohesion is not just a dream dreamt by Europeans.
We have to be aware of this, and our two countries, Belgium and Germany, will help turn this dream into reality.
Speech by Foreign Minister Steinmeier at the German-Belgian Conference
Europe is – quite wrongly – being made the scapegoat for all our problems.
We have to staunchly defend these values, for they are part and parcel of Europe’s own identity.
The triad we want to foster is made up of democracy, growth and solidarity.
Our actions are guided by this European dream.
He bid farewell to the Conference participants with the news that preparations for the next #DeBeConf were about to be launched, and that he was looking forward to it.
They were received by Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier, together with Belgium’s Prime Minister Elio Di Rupo and Foreign Minister Didier Reynders, at Werderscher Markt in Berlin.
The presence at the Conference of the Belgians’ Head of State and so many senior government representatives showed just how important the event was to their Majesties personally, Foreign Minister Steinmeier said.
In the first discussion of the afternoon, the high-ranking panellists and the public focused on German-Belgian answers for Europe.
And that this is one of the reasons for the current crisis in relations between Moscow and the EU?
Germany works hard to promote Europe.
we are convinced that sustainable reforms in the areas of business, state and society are the key to a future with more growth, prosperity and stability.
Minister, does it not bother you that on Kyiv’s Maidan groups which openly declare their allegiance to a nationalist and in some cases neo-Nazi ideology are playing an increasingly prominent role?
Close ties with Switzerland
Switzerland: Federal President Burkhalter in Berlin
At the Federal Foreign Office, the two Ministers had an in-depth discussion about the impact of the result of last week’s referendum in Switzerland on relations between the EU and Switzerland.
Furthermore, they spoke about the conflict in Ukraine, which has flared up again, and the Geneva II talks on Syria, which are yet to produce any results.
There is no doubt that reverting to violence in Ukraine will not lead to a settlement or to a good future for the country.
We will continue our efforts towards a solution to the conflict.
I also believe that we should follow the good example that the OSCE was able to set last weekend, in the negotiations on the release of prisoners in exchange for the vacation of public buildings, in the next phase of the search for a political solution.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier on the current situation in Kyiv
"We are in the midst of dramatic hours in Kyiv.
The reports of a renewed escalation of violence are alarming.
I condemn all forms of violence.
The issue was a central theme during the visit by the Swiss President and Foreign Minister to Berlin:
Whoever may believe that resorting to violence in Ukraine could lead to a resolution to the current situation has misjudged it.
Over the course of the day there has been violence and counter-violence.
It is up to the security forces however, to now ensure that the situation is de-escalated and that violence is not resorted to again.
Burkhalter stated at the start of his joint press conference with Steinmeier that the timing of his visit was perfect.
Concern about the referendum result
Foreign Minister Steinmeier stressed that relations between Germany, the EU and Switzerland were close:
All these events had a deep impact on Germany, Europe and often the whole world.
“Ukraine must not revert to violence”
Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement today (18 February) after a telephone conversation with Ukrainian Foreign Minister Leonid Kozhara:
I urgently call on all parties in the conflict in Ukraine to continue along the path pursued in recent days and to use discussions to seek a political solution.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier is shocked by the renewed escalation of violence in Kyiv and condemns all forms of violence.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier speaking about the dramatic situation in Ukraine
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier issued the following statement this evening (18 February) on the situation in Kyiv:
We are shocked by the fact that there have been deaths and injuries over the course of the day.
I want to emphasise that anyone who at this time is responsible for decisions which lead to further bloodshed, must also be aware that Europe will certainly reconsider the restraint it has shown in deciding whether to impose sanctions on individuals."
We want to do our part in fostering our common European culture of remembrance.
dramatic hours in Kyiv
President Burkhalter met the Federal Chancellor Angela Merkel in the morning.
One hundred years have passed since the outbreak of the First World War,
Ten years ago the EU’s eastward enlargement was successful.
The convergence of all these anniversaries gives 2014 a unique historical dimension.
Click here for more information on the talks between Chancellor Merkel and Switzerland’s President Burkhalter:
“Respect for Swiss vote”
Bild: Burkhalter and Steinmeier in Berlin
He said there was no doubt that “reverting to violence in Ukraine will not lead to a settlement or to a good future for the country”.
And last but not least, the year of commemoration 2014 challenges us at the Federal Foreign Office to reflect on our own work.
For example, a series of events entitled “1914 – of the failure of and the need for diplomacy” will focus on the question of what the failure of diplomacy in 1914 means for today’s foreign policy.
A very wide range of events will be organised for the individual anniversaries on a European and an international scale.
Our European partners will also be focusing their thoughts on reconciliation, learning from history and Europe’s future, as the occasion warrants.
The German Foreign Minister also praised the “good example” which the OSCE was able to set in the negotiations on the release of the demonstrators arrested during the protests and on the vacation of public buildings.
The OSCE is currently chaired by Switzerland.
Steinmeier called for this role to be continued in the further quest for a solution to the conflict.
More on the situation in Ukraine
Crisis in Ukraine: Steinmeier meets with Klitschko and Yatsenyuk
Syria: New round of talks needed
Steinmeier and Burkhalter also discussed the Geneva II talks on finding a solution to the Syria crisis, which ended yesterday without any result being reached.
The two Foreign Ministers emphasised that the talks would have to be continued in a further round.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and his Swiss colleague Burkhalter have met in Berlin where they discussed the outcome of the Swiss referendum as well as the conflicts in Ukraine and Syria.
During his visit to Berlin, Switzerland’s President Didier Burkhalter met Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier for talks.
Respecting the outcome of the referendum in Switzerland
Bild: In-depth exchange between Steinmeier and Burkhalter
What repercussions will the Swiss vote in favour of restricting immigration have on bilateral relations?
The impact of the referendum on freedom of movement between the EU and Switzerland has been analysed and commented on in many quarters in Switzerland, the EU and Germany during the last week.
“That’s why we’re reacting responsibly to the decision taken recently by the Swiss people on European freedom of movement.”
However, in view of our relations, which have been marked by cooperation over years and decades between Switzerland and the EU and which we don’t want to disrupt on a permanent basis, I’ve said that first of all we all have to respect the outcome of the Swiss referendum and secondly we have to comment without foaming at the mouth.
Ukraine: Violence is no way to reach a settlement
In the light of the escalation today in Ukraine, which has left three people dead in recent days, Steinmeier called on the parties to the conflict to end the violence.
Together with President Burkhalter, he appealed to the parties to the conflict in Ukraine to continue seeking a political dialogue.
Steinmeier called on “everyone with influence in the region to work to this end”.
They went on to say that the aim must be to at least achieve local ceasefires and humanitarian corridors to ensure that the civilian population has sufficient supplies and that this had to be done long before any decisions could be made about the country’s political future.
75 years since the start of the Second World War.
The perspective adopted and the form chosen to commemorate the individual historic events will be as diverse in 2014 as the events themselves were.
More than other years, 2014 provides us with the opportunity to consciously focus on specific aspects of our past from various angles.
If we consciously remind ourselves of the defining aspects of German history, we will be well equipped for this task.
Last updated on 11 February 2014
We are celebrating the fall of the Berlin Wall and the peaceful revolutions in Central and Eastern Europe for the 25th time.
We must not allow the important elements of our 20th century history to blur together simply because they all happen to fall in the same year, even though historical lines can be traced from 1914 to 2014.
By looking back to the beginning of the 20th century we want to consider the role that a responsible foreign policy ought to play in our complex and interconnected modern world.
The point is that people in Ukraine should have the opportunity to determine the future of their country themselves, in free elections.
Whichever path the voters decide to take, one thing is clear:
Yet embarking on a sustainable solution to the country’s economic problems is equally urgent.
Tension in Venezuela
Demonstration in Caracas
Budget deficits can be eliminated in the short term.
In the medium and long term, however, stabilisation can only realistically be achieved by seriously tackling the existing structural problems.
The situation in Venezuela is deteriorating: a peaceful demonstration in the capital, Caracas, on 12 February was followed by violent clashes.
The demonstrations taking place across the country are in protest at increasing violence and restrictions on civil rights.
Demonstrators are also demanding the release of detained students.
Journalists are protesting at the lack of paper and calling for greater freedom of the press.
What were initially peaceful demonstrations on 12 February later escalated into violence, killing three people.
Both Venezuelan and foreign media representatives were prevented, in some cases with violence, from reporting on events.
It is important to me to be offering Moscow trust-based, constructive collaboration right from the start of my second term in office.
Relations between Germany and Russia rely on millions of contacts in society and culture, business and politics.
We are united by many shared interests – reliable treaty-based relations, sustainable economic growth, long-term political stability.
Steinmeier emphasised that Germany was “naturally concerned” about the outcome with which “Switzerland intended to take another path.”
During his meetings with the Chancellor, the Foreign Minister and the press, he talked at length about the state of affairs in Switzerland.
He explained the current situation in his country and called for relations between Germany and Switzerland to become even closer.
Our opinions differ on some things, which undoubtedly include our perception of the relationship between the state and society, the rule of law and civil rights.
We also differ in our approach to dealing with the challenges of globalisation.
To preserve domestic stability and to hold our own successfully in the outside world, we need open debate and critical exchange.
The fact that this view is not shared everywhere in Russia should not stop us from engaging in dialogue.
it should be an incentive for us to engage with one another even more intensively.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier on the situation in Kyiv:
“Yesterday’s outbreak of violence was shocking, and the high number of casualties that the demonstrators and the police suffered last night is dreadful.
pressing need to refrain from violence and create a breathing space
Things must not be allowed to keep spiralling; there is a pressing need to create a breathing space.
It must be clear to everyone that violence is not a solution by any means; it only makes everything much worse than it already is.
Travel advice for tourists
At present tourists are being advised to keep away from protests and crowds.
However difficult it may be in view of yesterday’s outbreak of violence,
Venezuela is one of the most violent countries in the world.
the priority must now be to create the necessary conditions for restarting the process of political negotiation.”
Speaking on the fringes of the Franco-German intergovernmental consultations today (19 February), Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement on the situation in Kyiv:
President Yanukovych, the Government and the security forces have a responsibility to exercise prudence and de-escalate tensions.
Russian enterprises and German companies in Russia alike have a great need for highly qualified experts.
We should also intensify our cooperation on issues relating to energy efficiency and environmental protection.
I am keen to take tangible steps to strengthen our relations which help both Germany and Russia move forward.
Our common goal has to be for as many people as possible from the European Union and Russia to visit one another’s countries.
Visa-free travel could move our relations a huge step forward.
This goes for both economic exchange and intersocietal contacts.
We are holding fast to the long-term goal of lifting the visa requirement.
Some progress has finally been made in the negotiations.
Yet there is no point in putting ourselves under pressure.
It is more important for all the necessary legal and technical criteria to be fulfilled than to set a specific date.
Do you not get the feeling that the EU’s policy towards its eastern neighbours has recently been considerably influenced by the Baltic states and Poland, and that Germany and other countries from “old Europe”, which are less interested in geopolitical competition and more in favour of cooperation with Russia, have taken a back seat?
That also goes for the European Union’s common foreign policy towards our eastern neighbours.
It has nothing to do with geopolitical jostling for spheres of influence from the period of the Cold War, let alone a manoeuvre targeted against Russia.
We therefore intend to support the countries in our eastern neighbourhood along their path to reform and offer them wide-ranging assistance for this task.
And I expressly include Russia.
This debate requires input from our common neighbours, and from Germany, of course, as well as Russia, Poland, the Baltic states and all the other members of the European Union.
I believe that this is something that can be achieved.
Foreign policy developments in recent months also reinforce this.
Do you think it will be possible to involve Russia in mediation efforts to resolve the political crisis in Ukraine?
In my view what Ukraine lacks is not mediators but trust between the negotiating parties.
That is why we all have to do our part to promote dialogue between the opposition and government representatives in Ukraine.
Russia can also play a constructive role in this.
Through the Association Agreement we have made our offer of future-oriented relations between Ukraine and the European Union.
A good future for Ukraine cannot be founded on violence and extremism.
A political solution supported by the government, the opposition and above all by the Ukrainian people is what we now need.
Economic modernisation and political stability go hand in hand in the long term, as can be seen not only in Ukraine.
In the wake of violent clashes in Venezuela, EU High Representative Ashton has called for an inclusive dialogue between the Government and the opposition.
The EU High Representative called on the Venezuelan Government to allow peaceful demonstrations.
The Government and opposition each accuse the other side of being responsible for this escalation.
President Nicolas Maduro
The opposition has called for further major demonstrations against paramilitarism and violence today (Tuesday). The Government has issued a warrant for the arrest of opposition politician Leopoldo López, accusing him of "terrorism" and "incitement to murder".
EU High Representative’s appeal
Freedom of opinion and of the press were essential fundamental rights and representatives of all parties and sections of society should "maintain calm in both actions and words".
The German Government and its EU partners wholeheartedly support this call from the High Representative.
Unofficial statistics put the murder rate at 79 victims per 100,000 inhabitants; in Caracas the figure is over 120 – higher than in some war zones.
The oil-rich country also has to grapple with a high inflation rate (2013: 56.3%) and consumer goods shortages.
Statement by the Spokesperson of EU High Representative Catherine Ashton on the recent incidents in Venezuela, 14 February 2014
Grasping the opportunities of global urbanisation
The third business forum on architecture, planning and construction at the Federal Foreign Office focused on strategies to support the German construction industry in international markets.
The third business forum on architecture, planning and construction attracted a lot of interest,
with around 350 participants from across Germany taking up the invitation to talk about successful strategies in international markets at the Federal Foreign Office. The motto was German Skills for Growing Cities.
In his opening speech, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier emphasised his intention to support German industry by means of “intelligent and committed policy on foreign trade and investment”.
Steinmeier, Baer and Beckmeyer with representatives of the construction sector and staff
Demand is growing around the world for products and services from the architecture, planning and construction sector.
According to United Nations estimates, up to five billion people will be living in towns and cities in 15 years’ time.
This global urbanising trend presents major challenges to town planners and developers around the world.
It is their job to ensure that the growing towns and cities remain in possession of suitable infrastructure and sufficient residential space.
Global urbanisation as an opportunity for German businesses
In the speech he gave to open the business forum, Foreign Minister Steinmeier pointed out that it was “not always easy” for the countries affected to address the challenges associated with urbanisation.
However, he described this as presenting a “huge opportunity” for German business able to offer “holistic solutions”.
As he put it, urbanisation is after all “a trend that is making itself felt right across the sectors, from construction and underground engineering to public transport, energy systems, security and healthcare”.
He assured the participants representing these sectors that they had the support of the Federal Foreign Office and its missions abroad in their international endeavours.
Promoting foreign trade and investment is one of the Foreign Service’s main tasks.
The Federal Foreign Office and its 230-odd missions abroad aid and assist German firms worldwide.
The missions’ economic sections are above all keen to help small and medium-sized enterprises doing business abroad.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier at the opening of the business forum, flanked by Parliamentary State Secretaries Baer (l.) and Beckmeyer (r.)
Steinmeier’s speech also outlined how Germany and the German economy benefited disproportionately from globalisation.
Working to ensure that is one of the central responsibilities of German and European policy on foreign affairs and foreign trade and investment.
One further point was examined in Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s address.
The second major responsibility of foreign trade and investment policy was, he said, “to open up markets”.
Of particular importance here is the planned Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, or TTIP, which is currently being negotiated by the United States and the European Union.
Steinmeier warned that transparency would have to be at the top of the agenda if that free trade agreement was actually to be concluded.
The business forum on architecture, planning and construction creates an opportunity for experience to be shared between the business, political and diplomatic spheres.
It is also intended to promote collaboration by German businesses abroad and help enhance the networks connecting architects, engineers and representatives of the construction industry operating internationally.
The event was held at the instigation of the Federal Foreign Office in collaboration with six associations from the architectural, construction and engineering sectors.
It was organised in close collaboration with the Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Energy, the Federal Ministry of Transport and Digital Infrastructure.
The Federal Foreign Office and the missions abroad: partners to businesses operating abroad
External economic policy:
more than just promoting foreign trade and investment
That, he said, made us “more dependent than most other countries on a free, fair, rule-based economic order that works and remains secure”.
new chapter in the negotiations
The priority in the current round of negotiations between the E3+3 and Iran on its nuclear programme is to continue the talks in a constructive spirit.
In this process, Germany wants to make its contribution to a political solution of the conflict.
Ashton and Zarif in Vienna
Intensive and difficult negotiations
Mann made it clear that "intensive and long work" was expected.
Germany continues to strive for a political solution
I can assure you that Germany will continue to make an active contribution to the negotiation process.
Germany is represented at the meeting in Vienna by the Political Director of the Federal Foreign Office.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier plans visit to Kyiv
In view of the situation which has developed in Ukraine, Foreign Minister Steinmeier is planning to travel to Kyiv tomorrow morning (20 February), alongside his opposite numbers from Poland and France, Radosław Sikorski and Laurent Fabius.
Violence escalates in Ukraine:
In view of the situation, Foreign Minister Steinmeier plans to travel immediately to the Ukrainian capital Kyiv together with his Polish and French counterparts, Radoslaw Sikorski and Laurent Fabius.
Their visit on Thursday morning has been coordinated with EU High Representative Catherine Ashton.
On Tuesday (18 February) the situation in Caracas remained peaceful despite numerous large demonstrations; elsewhere however there was serious violence.
The opposition politician Leopoldo López, for whom an arrest warrant was issued following the riots last Wednesday, handed himself over to the police.
He had previously told his supporters that he had "nothing to hide" and that he was not afraid of being in custody.
The EU Partners fully support Ashton’s appeal.
The German Federal Government is concerned about the tense and confrontational situation in Venezuela.
It has been greatly saddened to receive reports of deaths and injuries caused by the clashes.
Hundreds were injured, many severely.
The E3+3 partners and Iran are still trying to reach a comprehensive solution to the nuclear dispute.
A new round of negotiations started in Vienna on Tuesday (18 February).
Following the successful conclusion of the Geneva agreement in November 2013 and the start of its implementation in January 2014, the next round of negotiations is commencing, led by EU High Representative Catherine Ashton.
Germany, which is one of three EU countries involved, wants to continue contributing to finding a political solution to this conflict, which has been ongoing for years.
The current round of talks between the so‑called E3+3 group of negotiators and Iran should constitute the beginning of a negotiation process which aims to find a long‑term solution with regard to the Iranian nuclear programme. This solution must ensure that the nuclear programme can only be used for peaceful purposes.
Commenting on this, Michael Mann, spokesman for EU High Representative Ashton, said that the aim of the first round of negotiations in Vienna was to create "a feasible framework to facilitate talks".
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the UN Security Council and the E3+3 countries have repeatedly called on Iran to be transparent and cooperate.
The goal is a comprehensive solution which prevents the nuclear armament of Iran.
Significant progress was made in November 2013 –
the E3+3 group of negotiators and Iran agreed on a Joint Plan of Action, the implementation of which was possible from 20 January 2014.
Before the three‑day long negotiations, the Federal Foreign Office Spokesperson, Martin Schäfer, emphasised that this would "without a doubt be a difficult process".
Therefore, together with our E3+3 partners we are calling on the Government in Tehran to conduct this round of negotiations with the same constructive spirit that made the Geneva Joint Plan of Action possible.
We want to make our contribution to finding a political, diplomatic solution to this complex issue which is of great significance to world politics.
The representatives of the E3+3 group and of Iran in Vienna
On the E3+3 side, the negotiations are led by EU High Representative Catherine Ashton.
On the Iranian side this role has been taken on by Foreign Minister Javad Zarif.
The E3+3 negotiating partners comprise the three EU countries Germany, France and the United Kingdom, as well as the US, Russia and China.
The Federal Government calls on all those involved to eschew violence and exercise moderation.
Respecting the right to demonstrate and not criminalising demonstrations form part of this.
Venezuela Country Profile
Opposition politician López being taken into custody
The Federal Foreign Office Spokesperson also stated on Wednesday that the issue of imposing sanctions on individuals was under consideration.
He said this issue would be on the agenda when the European Foreign Ministers met for a special session in Brussels to discuss events in Ukraine.
Joint visit to Kyiv
The trip has been discussed with Catherine Ashton, High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy.
Steinmeier meets Ukrainian opposition leaders Klitschko and Yatsenyuk
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier spoke on the telephone to his Ukrainian counterpart Leonid Kozhara again on Tuesday as the escalation began and urged him to use discussions to continue to seek a political solution to the conflict.
The deteriorating situation in Ukraine was also a key topic of discussion for the German Foreign Minister and his French counterpart Laurent Fabius on the fringes of the Franco-German Council of Ministers in Paris on Wednesday.
The situation in Ukraine remains a key issue in general:
on Thursday morning Steinmeier is expected in Kyiv with Fabius and their Polish counterpart Sikorski for talks with government and opposition representatives.
In the wake of violent clashes in Venezuela, EU High Representative Ashton has called for an inclusive dialogue between the Government and the opposition.
Three people were killed, dozens injured and many arrested.
The EU High Representative called on the Venezuelan Government to allow peaceful demonstrations.
Last Friday (14 February), President Nicolas Maduro presented a tenpoint plan to try and quell the unrest.
In a statement, EU High Representative Catherine Ashton said that freedom of expression and the right to participate in peaceful demonstrations were essential and called upon the authorities to reach out to all segments of Venezuelan society.
The Federal Foreign Office is reviewing its travel advice for Venezuela on a regular basis.
Statement by the Spokesperson of EU High Representative Catherine Ashton on the recent incidents in Venezuela, 14 February 2014 (PDF, 574 KB)
Travel and security advice for Venezuela
Whom do you intend to meet and what is the German Government’s most important message during your talks with your Russian partners?
I have known my opposite number, Sergey Lavrov, for many years, and we have close and regular contact. We met most recently less than two weeks ago at the Security Conference in Munich.
We need one another to tackle the major trouble spots, whether that be the civil war in Syria, the E3+3 negotiations on the Iranian nuclear programme, stability in Afghanistan or the resolution of conflicts in our shared neighbourhood, some of which have been around for more than 20 years.
Given our geography and history, the betrayal of civilised values by National Socialism and the experiences of the 20th century, we Germans have a responsibility to work on a common future with Russia.
I would like us to cooperate constructively in as many areas as possible, both in the capital and on a regional level, both through increased interaction between our civil societies and by strengthening the middle classes in our countries.
I am thinking, for example, of projects in the area of legal cooperation, in the health sector and to strengthen local government as well as working together more closely in the fields of education, science and research.
Vocational training is another area which lends itself to closer collaboration.
Is Germany willing to speak as plainly as France did recently in favour of waiving the visa requirement between the EU countries and Russia?
That will help those countries which are seriously interested in undergoing modernisation and which are undertaking difficult reform efforts.
It will also help the entire region, which will benefit directly from more intensive economic exchange and greater political stability.
I believe that it is possible to embark on a path like this, to everyone’s advantage.
We therefore need to join forces to consider what the opportunities are for further economic integration between Europe, Russia and our common neighbours and what conditions and limitations apply.
It includes involvement in destroying Syrian chemical weapons and bringing the conflicting parties in the Syrian civil war together around one negotiating table as well as initial steps towards finding a solution to the Iranian nuclear conflict.
Nobody wants to see the situation in Kyiv escalate further.
Do you not think that Europe should be sending a clear message to the Ukrainian opposition: if the future cabinet of ministers is to include people like Oleh Tyahnybok, leader of the Svoboda party, surely the EU cannot regard such a government as democratic and cooperate with it unreservedly?
Read on for information about all events held at the Federal Foreign Office as well as speeches and articles given or published by the Foreign Minister in connection with the centenary.
At least 25 people have died in violent clashes since Tuesday.
In the capital Kyiv, Ukrainian security forces began to clear protesters from Independence Square, also known as the Maidan, on Tuesday evening shortly after an ultimatum issued by the authorities had expired.
On Wednesday, the German Foreign Minister told the Ukrainian Government that
Steinmeier had already said on Tuesday evening that anyone who was responsible for decisions which led to further bloodshed also had to be aware that Europe would certainly reconsider the restraint it had shown in deciding whether to impose sanctions on individuals.
Steinmeier, Fabius and Sikorski travel to Kyiv
Fighting continues today.
In view of the situation, Foreign Minister Steinmeier flew to the Ukrainian capital Kyiv this morning together with his Polish and French counterparts, Radoslaw Sikorski and Laurent Fabius.
Today there have again been serious clashes on the Maidan, with yet more fatalities and injuries.
Steinmeier flew to Kyiv with his Polish and French counterparts, Radoslaw Sikorski and Laurent Fabius, on Thursday morning for talks with the Ukrainian Government and Opposition.
Prior to his departure, Steinmeier issued the following statement:
Only the parties in Kyiv can resolve the conflict.
Meeting with the Ukrainian Opposition
And we want to help the parties back to the negotiating table and towards a political solution.
We did not just find out yesterday that the regime in Pyongyang has constructed a totalitarian state devoid of any freedom for its citizens.
The report shows that in North Korea people are systematically murdered, tortured, sexually abused and starved.
It is clear that the cynicism with which those in power in Pyongyang torment their own population knows no bounds.
Torture, denunciation and the punishment of relatives for the crimes of a family member were the order of the day in the country, they stated.
The Ministers will fly back to Brussels together around lunchtime, with a view to discussing the situation in Ukraine with the other EU Foreign Ministers this afternoon.
In view of the dramatic situation in Kyiv and other cities across Ukraine, Foreign Minister Steinmeier had on Wednesday expressed his shock at the number of casualties and called for an immediate end to the violence.
Specific steps to strengthen Franco-German cooperation
Germany and France pledged to intensify their relations and to work towards a stronger Europe.
They also agreed to deploy the Franco-German Brigade in Mali.
Franco-German Council of Ministers steps up cooperation:
Consultations on Ukraine and Mali
Talks at the 16th Franco-German Council of Ministers were overshadowed by the devastating pictures from Kyiv following the most recent escalation of violence in Ukraine.
During the Council, Foreign Ministers Laurent Fabius and Frank-Walter Steinmeier, together with Poland’s Foreign Minister Radosław Sikorski, therefore decided to travel to Kyiv on Thursday to appeal to both parties in the conflict.
Group photo of the 16th Franco-German Council of Ministers
The Franco-German Council of Ministers, which convened in Paris today (19 February) for the 16th time, brought together almost all ministers from Germany and France.
The Council was chaired by Federal Chancellor Angela Merkel and France’s President François Hollande.
The two Commissioners for Franco-German Cooperation, Minister of State Michael Roth and European Affairs Minister Thierry Repentin, introduced the current cooperation agenda.
Joint contribution from the two Commissioners for Franco-German Cooperation:
Europe, a Union of Solidarity (published in the Frankfurter Rundschau newspaper on 17 February)
The Council of Ministers was supplemented by a meeting of the Franco-German Defence and Security Council, led by Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Fabius as well as Defence Minister Ursula von der Leyen and her French opposite number Yves Le Drian.
The meeting focused chiefly on projects designed to boost the impact and effectiveness of cooperation between the two countries in this area, including the European and transatlantic dimension.
Germany and France acknowledge their responsibility for Europe and thus intend to continue to work towards building a stronger Europe of stability and growth.
They reiterate their commitment to promoting competitiveness, growth and employment more intensively.
They also want to work together to complete the banking union.
At the same time the two countries wish to cooperate more closely in the fields of energy and climate policy.
Statement by the Franco-German Council of Ministers
A role model for intensive cooperation
In the run-up to the Franco-German Council of Ministers, Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Fabius met in Paris on 21 January and agreed to work to further strengthen their cooperation on foreign policy issues.
The goal of the Council of Ministers was to flesh out these projects.
The intergovernmental consultations are an excellent opportunity for Laurent Fabius and myself to continue our intensive dialogue.
We have been able to make considerable progress in our foreign policy cooperation since our last meeting in January.
Through our joint input we intend to contribute to the success of the Council of Ministers, both at the Franco-German Defence and Security Council and at the meeting of all government members at the Élysée Palace, and to some extent to serve as a role model for intensive Franco-German cooperation.
Council of Ministers with Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Fabius (centre)
The Council of Ministers agreed to coordinate decisions on foreign, security and defence policy and to elaborate joint options for action.
Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Fabius therefore plan to touch base with one another as a matter of course before the meetings of the EU’s Foreign Affairs Council.
Furthermore, Steinmeier and Fabius agreed to travel together to regions in Europe’s eastern and southern neighbourhood which are of particular interest to both countries and to the European Union.
They intend to start by visiting the Republic of Moldova and Georgia.
As a follow-up to their visit they will report back to the Bundestag and France’s Assemblée nationale.
The two Foreign Ministers also agreed to call upon the Policy Planning Staffs at the Foreign Ministries to cooperate on the early identification of crises and crisis prevention.
Moreover, in future Steinmeier and Fabius will each be able to attend cabinet meetings of the other side if the agenda renders this advisable.
Joint engagement in Africa
Meeting of the Franco-German Security and Defence Council: Federal Ministers Steinmeier and von der Leyen sitting opposite their counterparts Fabius and Le Drian
The Council of Ministers and the Security and Defence Council both formulated specific goals for future Franco-German cooperation.
The Security and Defence Council, for example, agreed to second part of the Franco-German Brigade to Mali.
On the occasion of the Brigade’s 25th anniversary, the aim was to develop and modernise it to bring it into line with developments in security policy.
In a joint statement Germany and France reiterate their “shared political, military, civilian and humanitarian commitment to stabilising Mali”.
They also stress the significance of the work of the EU Training Mission in Mali.
The two countries intend to participate in a planned civilian CSDP mission to provide additional training for Malian armed and security forces.
To this end parts of the Franco-German Brigade are to be deployed in Mali to conduct training measures.
This first instance of “joint engagement on the African continent will be an expression of our joint commitment to stabilising the region”.
The Defence and Security Council also agreed to continue to interact closely to implement the decisions of the European Council of December 2013 and to prepare the NATO Summit in autumn 2014.
Here you can read the entire statement from the Franco-German Defence and Security Council
Weimar Triangle Foreign Ministers to visit Ukraine
The rapid deterioration of the situation in Ukraine was a central topic of the talks between Foreign Minister Steinmeier and his French opposite number Laurent Fabius.
In light of the dramatic events in Kyiv, Steinmeier issued the following statement:
In view of the dramatic situation in Ukraine, Steinmeier, together with Foreign Minister Fabius and their Polish counterpart Sikorski, decided to travel to Kyiv on Thursday morning for talks with the government and the opposition.
On Thursday afternoon the Foreign Ministers of the European Union will meet in Brussels to discuss the situation in Ukraine.
Steinmeier, Fabius and Sikorski in Kyiv on Thursday
Foreign Ministers Meeting on 21 January 2014:
Steinmeier stressed that he was travelling to Kyiv with Sikorski and Fabius, his fellow “Weimar Triangle” Foreign Ministers, and in very close coordination with EU High Representative Ashton, thereby underscoring the joint position taken by Europe toward Ukraine.
He commented as follows on the chances of success of the mediation attempt:
Call for an end to the violence
noting that there was a pressing need for
a respite.
Commissioner for Human Rights Policy Strässer on the UN report on North Korea
Christoph Strässer, Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy, issued the following statement today (18 February) on the human rights situation in North Korea:
The UN commission of inquiry reports of unparalleled crimes committed by the the regime in North Korea.
However, the UN experts’ report has shone a spotlight on the inhuman character of this regime.
We will continue to work to make the regime give up its inhumane policy towards its own people.
UN experts accused the regime in Pyongyang of committing crimes against humanity in the report that they presented in Geneva on Monday.
The UN commission is calling for those responsible for the systematic human rights violations in North Korea to be prosecuted.
In its March session, the UN Human Rights Council will have to decide whether to make a recommendation to the Security Council to address the situation in North Korea.
Immediately upon their arrival, the three Foreign Ministers met with Ukrainian Opposition representatives Vitali Klitschko, Arseniy Yatsenyuk and Oleg Tyahnibok.
On Monday he had received the Ukrainian Opposition leaders Vitali Klitschko and Arseniy Yatsenyuk in the Federal Foreign Office for extensive talks on the situation in Ukraine.
Culture:
Crisis diplomacy in Ukraine
In view of the situation, Foreign Minister Steinmeier flew to the Ukrainian capital Kyiv on Thursday together with his Polish and French counterparts, Radoslaw Sikorski and Laurent Fabius.
By Wednesday, at least 25 people had been killed in this spate of violence.
Steinmeier flew to Kyiv with his Polish and French counterparts, Radoslaw Sikorski and Laurent Fabius, on Thursday morning for talks with the Ukrainian Government and Opposition.
Meeting with opposition and government representatives
Bundestag extends Afghanistan mandate
They then met the Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych in the heavily guarded government district.
Germany will remain engaged there in many different ways.
The meeting was overshadowed by reports of further fatalities in the fighting on the Maidan.
Bundestag votes by large majority to extend Afghanistan mandate
On 20 February the German Bundestag extended for the last time the mandate of the Bundeswehr contingent serving with the ISAF mission in Afghanistan.
Speaking after a meeting on Thursday, Italian Foreign Minister Emma Bonino said that the aim was to enforce visa bans and asset freezes against the people responsible for human rights violations and violence “very quickly”.
A total of 498 members of the Bundestag voted in favour of the Government’s motion and 84 against; there were 17 abstentions.
noting that there was a pressing need for a respite.
The mandate of the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan (ISAF) runs out at the end of 2014.
Open borders and open societies do us good!
Article by Minister of State Michael Roth.
Published in the Handelsblatt on 20 February 2014.
Europe has been beset by a ghost – the ghost of unchecked mass immigration.
It has been haunting our continent for weeks.
Be it the ramifications of “poverty immigration” in certain German communities or the referendum in Switzerland:
ever too often we are given the impression that national social security systems will be run dry and that a massive loss of jobs for locals will loom if we do not impose strict controls on immigration.
Such debates shake Europe to the core.
Indeed Europe is more than just a single market.
Europe is above all an area of freedom in which people of different origins are free to determine for themselves how to live their lives.
We must not ignore the population’s concerns however.
A citizen-oriented Europe also means that the EU does not control everything.
First of all the facts:
Germany has benefited enormously from the freedom of movement for workers and from the free movement of goods.
60% of our exports go to the EU, this ensures jobs and prosperity.
In the future we will be ever more reliant on skilled workers immigrating – from nurses to IT specialists – in order to maintain our economic strength and level of social security.
However, it is also true that the social and economic problems linked to immigration are concentrated in certain economically underdeveloped areas.
We must promote a peaceful atmosphere in these deprived areas – we must fund education and integration programmes.
If German companies shamelessly exploit migrants seeking to pick up casual jobs then this is a crime and must be punished as such.
We must therefore do everything that we can to overcome the wealth inequalities within Europe through a proper European social and employment policy.
In order to do this we need a Europe which views the mobility of its citizens as an opportunity and not a burden.
If this succeeds, then the spectre of mass immigration may finally be banished from people’s minds.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier travelled to Kyiv on Thursday with his Weimar Triangle counterparts.
There they negotiated with government and opposition representatives until the early hours of the morning.
Afghanistan taking over responsibility
Germany to remain engaged
Afghan graduates of a military academy
Germany will continue to provide up to 430 million euros a year in civilian reconstruction assistance.
Progress report on Afghanistan, January 2014, PDF | 1 MB
After twelve years the ISAF mission there will terminate at the end of 2014.
The new mandate cuts the maximum strength of the Bundeswehr contingent in Afghanistan from 4,400 to 3,300.
Violence between security forces and anti-government protesters in Ukraine is worsening.
The visit was coordinated with EU High Representative Catherine Ashton.
There followed the worst clashes between police and demonstrators since the anti-government protests began three months ago.
In the course of the four-hour long talks, the three Foreign Ministers proposed a road map leading to a political settlement.
In the evening Foreign Minister Fabius of France departed on a long-planned visit to China. Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Sikorski remained in Kyiv, negotiating with government and opposition representatives through the night.
Meanwhile, the remaining EU Foreign Ministers met in Brussels and agreed to impose sanctions on political leaders in Ukraine.
Things must not be allowed to keep spiralling, he said on the sidelines of the Franco-German Council of Ministers in Paris,
He stressed that President Yanukovych, the Government and the security forces had a responsibility to exercise prudence and de-escalate tensions.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier had earlier directed the following words to the Ukrainian Government:
Steinmeier spoke on the telephone to his Ukrainian counterpart Leonid Kozhara on Tuesday as the escalation began and urged him to use discussions to continue to seek a political solution to the conflict.
The German Bundestag voted on 20 February to extend and expand the mandate for Bundeswehr involvement in Mali.
The parliamentary decision envisages an extension of one year to the EUTM mandate, taking it to 28 February 2015.
The personnel ceiling is also rising from 180 to 250 soldiers, meaning that more German instructors could be sent to Mali in future.
Germany has pledged a total of 12 million euros in humanitarian aid for Mali since 2012, primarily to fund food aid and improve the returnee situation in northern Mali.
Germany and Chile sign arrangement on a "Working Holiday Programme"
Schütz (left) and Steinlein (right) signing the arrangement
Today (20 February), Secretary of State Stephan Steinlein and the Chilean Ambassador in Berlin, Jorge Eduardo O’Ryan Schütz signed an arrangement on a “Working Holiday Programme” (WHP) in the Federal Foreign Office.
Commenting on this, the Secretary of State said that the arrangement between Germany and Chile opened up a special opportunity for young Germans to become better acquainted with the partner country Chile, its people, its culture and its daily life.
Steinlein continued:
With this programme we are laying the foundations for young people to be able to work and take part in further training in our partner country without having to deal with a large amount of bureaucracy.
That ever more young people from both countries are coming together and taking the strong partnership between Germany and Chile into the future presents a fantastic opportunity.
Making the exchange more democratic
Lake Pehoé in Chile
The programme is aimed at young people between 18 and 30.
During their stay of up to a year in the partner country, they can take on holiday jobs or undertake training and further training courses.
This enables participants to gain valuable insights into the host country’s culture and daily life and to improve their language skills.
The work permit included in the visa also offers young people the chance to earn money in the host country and thus to fund their stay independently.
This opens up the programme to participants who do not have any financial support, for example from their parents, which makes the exchange more democratic.
Germany already has Working Holiday Programmes with Australia, Japan, New Zealand, South Korea, Hong Kong and Taiwan.
It has a similar programme with Canada (Youth Mobility/Experience Canada).
In addition to this programmes are being planned with Brazil, Argentina and Israel.
Chile Country Profile
Under the new mandate the number of German military personnel serving in Afghanistan will be further reduced.
On 13 January Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement in the Bundestag in this connection:
"This is the last time we vote on extending the ISAF mandate for Afghanistan.
After twelve years the Bundeswehr’s longest, toughest and in terms of casualties costliest combat mission terminates at the end of the year."
Taking stock during the Bundestag debate of what the mission had accomplished in the course of more than a decade, Steinmeier pointed out that many of the idealistic goals originally agreed at the Bonn International Conference on Afghanistan had not been achieved.
"However," he continued, "Afghanistan is at any rate no longer the principal training ground for international Islamist terrorism."
As agreed at the Lisbon NATO summit in 2010, by the end of 2014 Afghan security forces will have gradually assumed full responsibility for security throughout the country.
Right now they are already responsible for the security of 90% of the population.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier explained that 2014 will be a year of decision for Afghanistan:
"The international forces will end their combat mission, a new president will be elected and by the end of the year Afghanistan will have full responsibility for security."
Even when the Afghans have taken over full responsibility for security, Germany and the international community will remain engaged there, advising, training and supporting the country's security forces.
As from 2015, Germany has pledged some 150 million euros a year in funding for the Afghan National Security Forces.
Our engagement in the country is increasingly of a non-military nature.
The right of EU citizens’ to freely choose where they would like to live or work is one of the greatest achievements of the Union.
How can we persuade even those who are not directly involved of the merits of the free movement of persons?
Instead, we must use the facts to allay them when they are unfounded.
And in places where immigration does indeed lead to problems we must resolve them, with solidarity and without throwing basic European freedoms overboard.
This is how we differentiate ourselves from the populists who conceal the idea that the majority of existing problems can be better solved on the national, regional or local level.
In the midst of this heated debate the fact that the freedom of movement for workers actually alleviates the burden on our social security system is often swept under the carpet.
Overall, mobile EU citizens contribute more to our social security coffers than they take out – this is the case for pensions, unemployment and health insurance.
The Federal Government takes the concerns of the affected communities seriously and will propose concrete aid measures before the summer break.
Many Europeans come here because, due to the poor living conditions in their country of origin, they see no future there.
Bild: Assassination of the heir to the throne and his wife in Sarajevo
The German Ambassador in Vienna sent a report on the assassination to Berlin on which Kaiser Wilhelm II wrote handwritten comments.
Today this document is to be found in the Political Archive of the Federal Foreign Office.
Responsibility for Ukraine’s future and national unity
Foreign Minister Steinmeier calls on all those with political responsibility to be willing to compromise.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement in Berlin on Saturday (22 February) on the situation in Ukraine:
“We have now had two days without any more deaths in Kyiv, but we remain concerned for Ukraine.
The Ambassador reported that everything seemed to indicate that “the threads of the conspiracy (...) could be traced back to Belgrade”:
In this critical situation, everyone involved needs to be aware of the responsibility they bear for Ukraine’s future and its national unity.
Both sides must take care not to create circumstances that could have disastrous consequences.
However, he himself warned “calmly but earnestly and very emphatically” against “hasty steps”.
Kaiser Wilhelm II obviously did not agree with the Ambassador’s assessment and wrote in the margins:
I appeal in all urgency to those with political responsibility, who must now put a stop to political escalation and ensure that good judgement prevails.
“That is very stupid! (...) The Serbs have to be crushed.”
Channels of communication and willingness to compromise regardless of political camp or regional difference are needed now more than ever.
And so:
the assassination in Sarajevo triggered the July Crisis in Europe.
All political decisions have to be guided by the need to preserve Ukraine’s territorial integrity and national unity.
The existing constitutional order is the legal framework for all political decisions.
The Austrian military urged a retaliatory strike against Serbia.
We welcome the news that Yulia Tymoshenko was released today.
I hope she is in good health.
She too bears great responsibility for her country’s future.”
The Sarajevo assassination
While being driven through the centre of Sarajevo, an assassin shot the Archduke and his wife, who died from the wounds they sustained.
Ambassador warns against “hasty steps”
Shortly after a meeting with the German Kaiser, Archduke Franz Ferdinand and his wife Sophie arrived in the Bosnian capital to observe the conclusion of a manoeuvre by the Austrian armed forces in Bosnia.
Austria was outraged by the heir to the throne’s assassination.
Von Tschirschky said that he had heard the Austrians expressing the wish that the Serbs now be “dealt with severely”.
The German Ambassador’s report is still in the Political Archive of the Federal Foreign Office and bears witness to the fateful events and decisions of the summer of 1914.
An agreement on the Settlement of the crisis in Ukraine is signed
The Foreign Ministers of Germany, France and Poland issued a joint statement on the signing of the agreement:
“Everyone did their bit”
Directly after the signing, Foreign Minister Steinmeier underlined that the agreement fulfils four important demands made by the Opposition:
I hope that all sides will work to implement the agreement in the next few days.
This framework must now be fleshed out by the Ukrainians themselves. We will keep an eye on events to see that the provisions of the agreements reached here are implemented.
It was worth it, everyone did their bit.
This was not achieved by individuals, it was achieved above all by those who found a way to approach each other here in Ukraine, a way which they were unable or unwilling to find in the past.
Weimar Triangle as mediator
After the departure of the French Foreign Minister on a long planned visit to China on Thursday evening, Steinmeier and Sikorski remained in Kyiv, negotiating a solution with all parties involved until the early hours of the morning.
The council is formed of various different opposition groups who had been calling for President Yanukovych to resign immediately.
After the discussion with the two Foreign Ministers the representatives of the Maidan Civic Council also supported the agreement.
This paved the way for it to be signed.
Prior to his departure to Ukraine on Thursday morning, Steinmeier issued the following statement:
Ukraine now needs a functioning interim government to be put in place as soon as possible to safeguard public order throughout the country.
President Viktor Yanukovych and the Opposition leaders have agreed on a preliminary agreement to solve the internal crisis in Ukraine.
The agreement includes early presidential elections, a return to the 2004 constitution and the creation of an interim cabinet which would include members of the Opposition.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier helped to mediate the negotiations on the agreement.
The preliminary agreement between the Government and Opposition in Ukraine includes a return to the 2004 constitution within a period of 48 hours after it is signed.
Moreover, within a period of 10 days an interim government of national unity should be formed and the constitution should be reformed before September 2014.
Presidential elections should take place as soon as a new constitution has been agreed upon and in any case no later than December 2014.
The latest acts of violence should be investigated and the cases resolved by the Ukrainian authorities responsible, in cooperation with the Opposition and the Council of Europe.
the formation of a new government, a return to the 2004 constitution, the elaboration of a new constitution before September 2014 and early presidential elections.
These were the key demands and after difficult negotiations – we negotiated for around 30 hours – we were able to incorporate them.
Steinmeier and his Polish counterpart Sikorski with Opposition leaders Klitschko, Yatsenyuk and Tyahnibok
Beforehand, Foreign Minister Steinmeier and his counterparts from France and Poland, Laurent Fabius and Radoslaw Sikorski, had laid the groundwork for an agreement during difficult negotiations between the Government and Opposition.
After an initial meeting with representatives of the Ukrainian Opposition Vitali Klitschko, Arseniy Yatsenyuk and Oleg Tyahnibok, they met for over four-hour long talks with Ukrainian President Yanukovych in the heavily guarded government district.
The Weimar Triangle Foreign Ministers arrive for a meeting with President Yanukovych
On Friday, together with Opposition leaders Klitschko, Yatsenyuk and Tyahnibok, they took part in a meeting of the so-called Maidan Civic Council.
The visit to Kyiv was the first joint trip undertaken within the framework of the so-called Weimar Triangle; the Foreign Ministers of Germany, Poland and France.
We want to talk to President Yanukovych and Opposition representatives in order to urge both sides to call a reprieve and to scale back the violence.
Steinmeier had stressed that he was travelling to Kyiv with Sikorski and Fabius, his fellow “Weimar Triangle” Foreign Ministers, and in very close coordination with EU High Representative Ashton, thereby underscoring the joint position taken by Europe toward Ukraine.
“We cannot know whether we will manage to avert something even worse.
But in my opinion, Europe has a responsibility to try.”
Press release on the signing of the agreement (21 February 2014)
Crisis diplomacy in Ukraine (21 February 2014)
“Spain is a key partner”
He is having talks with his Spanish counterpart, José Manuel García-Margallo, and with Alfredo Pérez Rubalcaba, the Secretary-General of the Spanish Socialist Workers Party (PSOE).
To mark the year of commemoration 2014, each month we are publishing an original document from the Federal Foreign Office archive accompanied by a brief text with background information.
On 28 June 1914, the heir to the Austro-Hungarian throne was assassinated in Sarajevo. This assassination triggered the July Crisis which ultimately led to the outbreak of the First World War.
A report on the assassination by the German Ambassador in Vienna with handwritten comments by Kaiser Wilhelm II in the margins is kept in the Political Archive of the Federal Foreign Office.
On 28 June 1914, the heir to the Austro-Hungarian throne, Archduke Franz Ferdinand, and his wife were assassinated in Sarajevo. This assassination triggered the July Crisis which ultimately led to the outbreak of the First World War.
Bild: Report by the German Ambassador in Vienna with comments in the margins by Kaiser Wilhelm II
On 30 June 1914, the German Ambassador in Vienna, Heinrich von Tschirschky und Bögendorff, wrote to the Chancellor.
Serbia was believed to be responsible for recruiting and arming those who carried out the assassination.
The German Chancellor, Theobald von Bethmann-Hollweg, assured Germany’s ally Austria that it had his country’s full backing. This amounted to a licence to wage war against Serbia.
What then followed was a series of ultimatums and declarations of war which ultimately led to the First World War – the “seminal catastrophe of the 20th century”.
Report by the German Ambassador in Vienna, Heinrich von Tschirschky, with comments in the margins by Kaiser Wilhelm II (original) (PDF, 2 MB)
Report by the German Ambassador with comments in the margins (printed version from: Kautsky, Die deutschen Dokumente zum Kriegsausbruch 1914) (PDF, 565 KB)
The main issues discussed were bilateral relations and the implementation of the Spanish reform agenda.
Acknowledging success and sacrifices in equal measure
Looking ahead to the forthcoming European elections, he said that Spain was a “key partner” in defending the European idea:
“Israel is not alone”
The Jewish and democratic State of Israel has a unique connection with Germany.
No other state in Europe works as closely with Israel as we do in the fields of politics, science, culture and business.
It was a long and difficult journey that our countries travelled together to reach this point and given our history it seems like a miracle.
Would anyone in Israel ever trust the country of the perpetrators?
When, in 1965, Germany and Israel established diplomatic relations, they regarded each other warily.
In the future, Israeli nationals in a state of distress will be able to obtain assistance from German consular officers if they are in countries in which Israel has no consular post of its own.
This unique agreement once again illustrates how deeply Germany and Israel trust each other and how special the quality of relations between the two countries is.
Our meeting comes at a time of dramatic change in the Middle East.
Syria is sinking into a brutal civil war.
Israel’s Arab neighbours are being shaken by protests and changes in leadership.
New and dangerous terrorist structures are undermining weak state structures in Israel’s neighbourhood.
The Iranian nuclear programme looms threateningly on the horizon.
Nonetheless, this is also a time of negotiations and attempts to find political solutions.
We fully support this endeavour and encourage Israel to make the difficult yet necessary decisions.
In Vienna, the United States, Russia, China, the United Kingdom, France and Germany are in negotiations on the future of the Iranian nuclear programme.
Our aim here is clear: the nuclear armament of Iran is unacceptable.
The current debates on Europe’s policy on Israel have highlighted this once again.
Yet Israel has not been left on its own.
Germany and Europe are important partners who resolutely advocate Israel’s legitimacy and right to exist.
Does this mean that we will agree on all issues?
It means that Israel and its people are very important to us.
So important, that for years we have time and again made political efforts to achieve lasting and stable peace for Israel and its neighbours.
So important that we clearly address and strive to overcome all obstacles along the way.
And equally so important that we go to great lengths to champion a strong Israel.
It is both invaluable and unique.
He went on to say that Spain had left the recession behind and exited the ESM programme – that was a great success.
Steinmeier stated that he was also aware of the sacrifices which many Spanish people had been forced to make.
He pointed out that it was important to ensure that the economic crisis did not give rise to a political crisis in the EU.
Steinmeier stressed that Germany was taking its responsibility very seriously against this background.
Interview with Foreign Minister Steinmeier in the Spanish daily “El País” (24 February 2014)
Foreign Minister Steinmeier is on his first official visit to Madrid since returning to office.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier travelled to Spain on 23 February for his first official visit since returning to office.
Afterwards, he was greeted at the Palacio de Viana, the Spanish Foreign Minister’s guest house, by his opposite number, José Manuel García-Margallo.
During his visit, the German Foreign Minister told the Spanish daily “El País” that the years of crisis had given eurosceptics a worrying boost in some EU countries.
The German Foreign Minister believed that even the Ukrainian leadership had realised “that what we have experienced in recent days is leading to a tragedy in Ukraine”.
Even as the negotiations were taking place many people were being killed and injured.
This had led the Ukrainian leadership to rethink matters and by "negotiating patiently" it was possible to work out a compromise between Government and Opposition.
In conclusion, Steinmeier emphasised:
However, there have also been developments in the bilateral relations between Germany and Israel.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier in the Israeli daily newspaper Yedioth Ahronoth on the occasion of the German-Israeli intergovernmental consultations.
It is unlikely that any observer would have predicted that nearly 50 years later, German and Israeli Ministers would sit at a cabinet table together to organise cooperation in a wide range of political fields.
And yet that is exactly what the Federal Chancellor and 14 German Ministers will be doing with their Israeli colleagues from next Monday onwards.
How tangible the effects of this cooperation are for people in Germany and Israel can be seen in the arrangement on consular assistance that we are going to sign.
In addition to talks with Foreign Minister García-Margallo, he has met Alfredo Pérez Rubalcaba, the Secretary-General of the Spanish Socialist Workers' Party (PSOE).
Under the auspices of the United States’ mediation efforts, Israel decided to hold talks with the Palestinians on a two-state solution.
Israel often feels that it has been left on its own and is not understood.
That is unlikely.
As Foreign Minister of Germany, it means a lot to me that my country and Israel have established a multi-faceted friendship.
We are going to greatly enhance the collaboration between our Foreign Ministries with an agreement on consular cooperation.
This will make it possible in future for Israeli citizens to turn to German missions abroad for assistance in countries where Israel does not have its own missions.
Of course, we will discuss the state of the peace process and we will try to establish where obstacles still stand in the way of a solution.
It is quite obvious that the settlement policy continues to be one of these obstacles and this issue will therefore also be brought up.
In the past, we have stated clearly that we regard the decisions on settlement expansion not only as unhelpful but also as an impediment to the efforts to find a peace settlement and, naturally, we will also talk about this during the visit.
Startseite: “Spain is a key partner”
cooperation with Russia, Syria, prospects for German foreign policy, German military operations abroad, German-American relations.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier has been on his first official visit to Madrid since returning to office.
How viable do you think the compromise is?
While in the Spanish capital, he had talks with his Spanish counterpart, José Manuel García-Margallo, and with Alfredo Pérez Rubalcaba, the Secretary-General of the Spanish Socialist Workers Party (PSOE).
When we arrived, black smoke was hanging over the Maidan, and we could hear shots being fired.
We kept receiving news of more deaths.
We all knew that our mediation attempts were without a doubt the last chance to find a political solution.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier travelled to Spain on Sunday for his first official visit since returning to office.
While in the Spanish capital, he had talks with his Spanish counterpart, José Manuel García-Margallo, and with Alfredo Pérez Rubalcaba, the Secretary-General of the Spanish Socialist Workers Party (PSOE).
Both sides nonetheless sharply criticised the agreement.
Moreover, he stressed Germany and Spain’s common interest in not only leading Europe out of the economic crisis but also giving the continent a political future.
On Monday morning, Steinmeier first met Alfredo Pérez Rubalcaba, the Secretary-General of the Spanish Socialist Workers Party (PSOE).
The main topics discussed by the two Foreign Ministers were bilateral relations and the implementation of Spain’s reform agenda as well as international issues such as the Middle East peace process and the situation in Ukraine.
Europe is part of the solution
During a joint press conference with García-Margallo, Steinmeier praised the close bilateral relations based on mutual trust between Germany and Spain.
Europe is not the problem. Rather, Europe will be part of the solution to our problems.
Our plan sets out a clear timetable which leaves little or no room for interpretation.
Yet the plan is only as good as the desire of the signatories to implement it both in word and in spirit.
The German Foreign Minister expressed his respect and recognition to the Spanish people for the way in which the reforms had been implemented:
Of course there are risks; we aren’t out of the woods yet.
There will no doubt be attempts to thwart the plan.
Can President Yanukovych be part of the solution?
That is for voters in Ukraine to decide.
The presidential elections are due to be held before the end of 2014.
He has agreed to this.
Has Russia attempted to thwart your efforts?
Our timetable is supported by Russia.
Steinmeier told the Spanish daily “El País” that the years of crisis had provided a worrying boost for eurosceptics in some EU countries.
On Thursday President Putin sent an emissary to Kyiv who then participated in negotiations through the night, making a very constructive contribution.
The Russian representative helped to build bridges and at least initialled the text.
He said that Spain was a “key partner” in defending the European idea:
Putting an end to the bloodshed is also in Russia’s interests.
Before leaving Madrid today (24 February) for the German-Israeli intergovernmental consultations in Jerusalem, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier issued the following statement:
The Middle East peace process will play a prominent role.
We support John Kerry’s efforts to finally bring about the two-state solution and I hope that our partners will listen to our arguments.
Bild: View of Madrid
German-Spanish relations
The impression until now was that President Putin was supporting the conflict.
A week ago in Moscow I discussed the situation in Kyiv at length with Vladimir Putin.
shaping the process responsibly
He agreed with me that the worst possible scenario for Ukraine would be for it to remain caught in the tug of war between east and west for the next ten years.
Developments in Ukraine have been picking up speed again since the weekend.
Speaking in Madrid on Monday, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier emphasised the need to shape the reform process responsibly and safeguard the country’s unity.
Anarchy and civil war in its direct neighbourhood is certainly not in Russia’s interests.
In view of the bleak economic situation in Ukraine, he said, it was vital to prevent the country falling into bankruptcy.
The German Government intends to play a significant role in those efforts,
After the two meetings, Steinmeier expressed his respect to the Spanish people for the way in which the reforms had been implemented.
He said that this was due to the two countries’ shared interest in not only leading Europe out of the economic crisis but also giving the continent a political future.
After many struggles to find a consensus between the Government and opposition in Ukraine, the two sides signed an agreement on 22 February.
He went on to say that European governments had a special responsibility in the light of the forthcoming European elections:
All European governments have a responsibility to seek a dialogue with their citizens and to say time and again:
Both the Government and the Opposition have had to bite the bullet.
The President and the Opposition leaders must see it through even in the face of considerable opposition in their own ranks.
It was a journey into the unknown.
I firmly believe that this will become evident in some months’ time.
I fully recognise that people in Spain have endured difficult times.
I am therefore all the more pleased that although we have not yet overcome the crisis in Europe, there is some light at the end of the tunnel and we can dare to hope that conditions in the labour market will improve and that the unemployment rate in Spain will fall.
However, we could not foresee that the number of victims would increase further on the day of our arrival.
Does European policy not bear some of the responsibility for the escalation?
It’s no use crying over spilt milk.
But we mustn’t forget that it was Ukraine that wanted an association agreement with the European Union.
Opposition leaders such as Vitali Klitschko called for sanctions at an early stage. The United States was also in favour.
Should you have listened to them?
Simply calling for sanctions does not in itself constitute wise policymaking.
Sanctions have to remain a means to an end – they cannot be an end in themselves.
When all’s said and done, I believe that we handled this tool responsibly.
Has Russia suddenly discovered that cooperation is in its interests?
Among other things, the terms of the agreement include reinstituting the 2004 constitution, which granted more rights to the Ukrainian parliament.
Russia is an important but not an easy partner.
More on the agreement
With regard to Syria’s chemical weapons, the Iran dossier and now in the case of Ukraine we have managed to find solutions.
So you intend to pursue your policy towards Russia, which periodically led to conflicts with the Chancellery during your first term of office?
What would the alternative be?
To go away and sulk in a corner and refuse to engage in talks?
The issue isn’t whether we should be talking to governments like Russia’s, but how.
Russia is a European country, and I want it to remain so.
We have very divergent conceptions of the rule of law and civil rights.
During your first term of office you also established contact with the Syrian President Bashar al-Assad.
The idea that Assad could become a partner of the west seems illusory from today’s perspective.
And if people had listened to you, would things have not unfolded as they did?
The Ukrainian parliament subsequently took a series of personnel decisions, including removing President Yanukovych from office.
Syria teaches us that we have to take the trouble to painstakingly analyse political conflicts before making decisions.
And what are the consequences now?
In the short and medium term I see no possibility of a political solution.
For someone who is an exponent of an active foreign policy, that sounds very tame.
Active foreign policy doesn’t mean that we have a solution up our sleeve for every conflict.
Then please explain what it does mean.
In Germany we have acquired the unfortunate habit of commenting on the actions of others.
Often we know precisely what the British, the French and the Americans are doing wrong.
And yet we are not prepared to do any more ourselves.
I want to change that.
That hasn’t always bothered you.
The Chairman of the Ukrainian parliament, Volodymyr Rybak, also resigned.
When the UN Security Council gave the green light for the operation in Libya two years ago, Germany abstained.
You supported that.
We must distinguish between different things.
Former head of government Yulia Tymoshenko was released on Saturday on the basis of a parliamentary resolution.
And I am not too impressed by what those who dropped their bombs on Libya left in their wake.
Shaping the political process responsibly
Foreign Minister Steinmeier continues to pay close attention to developments in Ukraine.
And the vote in the Security Council?
The situation remains tense and unstable.
In Madrid for his first talks there since taking office, Steinmeier issued the following statement on Monday:
The important thing now is for those who were in opposition before, and who will now be assuming the imminent responsibilities, to shape this process in a responsible manner.
On that subject, he said it was now vital to form an interim Government as soon as possible that reflected the various parts of the country.
We have seen in Kyiv that this can work.
You yourself have said in connection with military operations
that the culture of restraint must not become a culture of standing aloof.
Have we been too aloof in the past?
German Government Spokesperson Steffen Seibert said on 24 February that the transition must culminate in “elections which are free, fair, transparent, democratic” and which provide the foundations of “the new leaderships’ full democratic legitimacy”.
He pledged that Germany and the EU would play their part.
It is about foreign policy.
Nothing is going to change as far as that is concerned.
Your Cabinet colleague Ursula von der Leyen says that Germany can no longer look away when murder and rape are a daily reality.
She was specifically referring to military operations.
Do you share her view?
We said no to the war against Iraq, and yes to involvement in Afghanistan.
That is how it will be in the future, too.
Then why do we need the new foreign policy you are now advocating?
That we need to do a few things differently is simply down to the fact that the world has changed.
And a few people have indeed noticed that the profile of foreign policy is beginning once again to change for the better.
I have initiated a process of self-assessment at the Federal Foreign Office.
Speaking on the programme “Berlin direkt” on Sunday, Foreign Minister Steinmeier called for good use to be made of the “respite” created by the agreement.
The goal is to trigger a public debate on the conditions and prospects of German foreign policy.
In our Review 2014 – A Fresh Look at German Foreign Policy we also intend to ask whether German foreign policy has been setting the right priorities in recent years.
Do you have the impression that the Chancellor also thinks it is time for a critical review of the past four years?
I’m not aware that the Chancellor has anything against Germany being more prominent in the world and concentrating on key foreign-policy challenges.
The chance to achieve a lasting political settlement was now in the hands of the Ukrainian people, he said:
The Merkel doctrine preferred supplying weapons to critical regions so that the regional players could sort things out for themselves.
Germany’s restrictive arms export policy remains in place.
That is a fundamental social-democratic conviction.
But we want to go further, to make arms exports more transparent.
This was a day after Yulia Tymoshenko, formerly head of Ukraine’s Government, was released from prison.
Foreign Minister welcomed her release and pointed out that she too carried great responsibility with respect to her country’s future.
Stabilising the economic situation
Signing the agreement on the Settlement of the crisis in Ukraine
We have talked about dealing with difficult partners.
This Thursday you will be visiting one of them.
The transitional Government of Ukraine drew attention to the country’s very difficult economic situation.
What will you say to United States Secretary of State John Kerry about the mood in the Federal Government?
He is aware of it.
The Members thereafter elected Oleksandr Turchynov as their new Chairman and acting President.
Acting President Turchynov described Ukraine as standing “on the brink of insolvency”.
The United States seems unwilling to engage in a debate on the work of the intelligence services.
According to the interim Government, funding the state over the next two years will take 25 billion euros.
The rifts are deep, and the work that lies ahead of us should not be underestimated.
On this issue, Foreign Minister Steinmeier made clear that he would seek talks with the International Monetary Fund, among others, while in Washington this week, in order to discuss the question of financial assistance.
So the Americans continue to monitor us without batting an eyelid, and your reaction is,
“Let’s talk about it”?
I don’t believe that the Americans will continue as before.
Deputy Federal Foreign Office Spokesperson Sawsan Chebli underlined the need to act quickly to prevent bankruptcy and
pledged Germany’s intention to play a significant role in that endeavour.
Mr Steinmeier, thank you for talking to us.
Ms Chebli also announced the installation of a Federal Foreign Office working group headed by State Secretary Markus Ederer.
In other areas the European and American understanding of data protection is still very different.
Bringing together representatives of various Ministries, the working group is intended to coordinate the German Government’s position, thereby to help Ukraine on its road towards economic stability and political unity.
Interview with Foreign Minister Steinmeier on the situation in Ukraine, published in the Spiegel magazine on 23 February: Ukraine: “We aren’t out of the woods yet”
Federal Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier in an interview with Der Spiegel on his joint mediation attempt with the French and Polish Foreign Ministers in Kyiv.
I believe that made all parties more inclined to make the necessary compromises.
And if it became a failed state, Ukraine would topple towards the east, thereby placing a burden on Russia.
Your party comrade Gerhard Schröder has said that the Europeans are unsuitable mediators in Ukraine because they are perceived as one of the parties.
What prompted you to travel to Kyiv with your French and Polish colleagues?
The decision took shape over the past few days during talks with Laurent Fabius and Radek Sikorski.
We were aware of the risks; an agreement seemed unlikely.
Nonetheless, we believed that we had an obligation to at least try from the outside to find a way out of the spiralling escalation.
With hindsight, was it right that, with the association agreement, the EU confronted Ukraine with a choice between Russia and Europe?
If, in our foreign policy, we cultivate the habit of not speaking to states which do not share our stance, we will get absolutely nowhere in resolving the many crises in the world.
In your first term of office you advocated a quiet approach – without much success.
As far as the success of foreign policy is concerned, history will decide.
And as yet we have no proof that the loud voices with their radical approaches will leave a positive stamp on it.
Some criticism of Russia is justified.
Nonetheless, we ought to try to cooperate even more closely in the areas in which we can work together to have a positive impact.
In this context I have adopted the phrase “positive agenda”.
with Foreign Minister Steinmeier heading to Washington for talks with the International Monetary Fund this week.
The agreement had been reached with mediation provided by the German, French and Polish Foreign Ministers.
The Foreign Minister had previously spoken repeatedly of his concern at the risk of Ukraine being split up.
The important thing now is that those who are going to bear responsibility need to make their philosophy not about revenge but about safeguarding national unity for the future of Ukraine.
Have developments in Syria proved you wrong on this point?
That’s your opinion.
At that time I found the division of the world into black and white along the axis of evil much more unrealistic.
I appealed for talks to be held with Assad at a time when he was not so blinkered by ideology.
I am not as convinced as you are that that was such a bad thing!
If we manage to stop violent clashes by means of local ceasefires and humanitarian corridors in individual regions, we will have achieved a lot.
Foreign-policy conflicts often flare up in a couple of weeks and can take two decades to resolve.
We shouldn’t wait until the horse has bolted before closing the stable door.
I believed then, and I still do believe that Germany was right not to participate in the intervention.
We could argue about that, but it is water under the bridge now.
One factor was the vote in the Security Council, the other was Germany’s decision not to make a military contribution itself.
Human Rights Commissioner on the Anti-Homosexuality Bill in Uganda
That sounds as if it is mainly about diplomacy.
And it is pretty absurd that the quality of good foreign policy is measured according to the number of operations abroad and the number of military personnel deployed there.
The decision to conduct military operations must be a last resort.
In the late 1990s I was involved in the decision-making process on whether we should participate in the NATO air strikes against Serbia.
That isn’t a contradiction in terms.
Those were very difficult decisions which we made with great awareness of the responsibility we carried.
In the medium term the whole basis will therefore shift.
In future, exports of tanks to Saudi Arabia won’t simply happen.
Incidentally, I doubt whether a no-spy agreement will really move us forward.
I condemn the signing into law of the Anti-Homosexuality Bill by Ugandan President Yoweri Museveni in the strongest possible terms.
Human rights are universal and indivisible.
The spectrum of possible punishment ranges up to life in prison.
Unveiling of the joint logo to mark the 50th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between Germany and Israel in 2015
Joint press statement by the Federal Foreign Office and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the State of Israel
The Government of the State of Israel and the German Government held the fifth round of German-Israeli intergovernmental consultations in Jerusalem today.
One of the issues discussed was the celebration of the 50th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between the two countries in 2015.
The two young artists said that they had had two things in mind when designing their submission:
Ahead of the intergovernmental consultations, the Foreign Ministries of Israel and Germany – in cooperation with the Bezalel Academy of Arts and Design – held a logo competition, in which German-Israeli teams of students worked together to produce an anniversary logo.
A unique connection with Israel
At the German-Israeli intergovernmental consultations in Jerusalem, Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Liberman signed an arrangement on consular assistance for Israeli citizens.
German-Israeli intergovernmental consultations
The fifth German-Israeli intergovernmental consultations are currently taking place in Jerusalem, headed by Federal Chancellor Angela Merkel and Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu.
The aim of the talks is to further strengthen bilateral relations.
To this end, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier and his Israeli counterpart Avigdor Liberman signed an arrangement on consular assistance this morning.
From now on, Israeli citizens abroad will be able to seek assistance from German consular posts if Israel does not have a representation of its own where they are.
A unique connection
Plenary session with both Governments in Jerusalem
According to Steinmeier, against the backdrop of history this seemed “like a miracle.”
On Tuesday morning, as part of the consultations, the Federal Government met with the Israeli side for a plenary session.
Federal Chancellor Merkel and Prime Minister Netanyahu led the talks.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier met his Israeli counterpart on Monday evening for such a talk.
This is the fifth time that the bilateral consultations have taken place.
Nearly all Federal Ministers are staying in Israel on Monday and Tuesday.
The first intergovernmental consultations took place in 2008 on the occasion of the 60th
anniversary of the State of Israel’s founding.
Middle East peace process central topic
The aim of the talks is to further strengthen and expand German-Israeli relations
and therefore a number of topics make up the agenda for the discussions.
The Federal Chancellor stressed that there was a desire to discuss “challenges of the future”.
On a bilateral level, priorities include the fields of science and research, the environment and exchanges for young people.
The preparations for the 50th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between Germany and Israel in 2015 are also part of the discussions.
Steinmeier and Livni on the fringes of the consultations
He met Israel’s Minister of Justice, Tzipi Livni, as well as the Prime Minister’s aide for the peace negotiations, Isaac Molcho on Tuesday morning to discuss the process.
Steinmeier went on to express the hope that the state of the peace process would be discussed and obstacles would be identified.
From the German point of view, the settlement policy was an obstacle “and, naturally, we will also talk about this”, the Foreign Minister continued.
Strengthening concrete cooperation
The intergovernmental talks also addressed measures to make concrete improvements to bilateral cooperation between the two countries.
Six agreements were signed on this.
Arrangement on consular assistance concluded:
An arrangement on consular cooperation was concluded by the Foreign Ministers on Tuesday morning:
Furthermore, she was pleased that the so-called “Working Holiday Programme” had been signed by the Foreign Ministers.
Human Rights Commissioner on the Anti-Homosexuality Bill in Uganda and the publication of a list of Uganda's "top homosexuals"
Christoph Strässer, the Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid, today (25 February) issued the following statement on the signing into law of the Anti-Homosexuality Bill by the Ugandan President Yoweri Museveni and on the publication of a list of Uganda's "top homosexuals":
I also condemn the publication of a list of names of "top homosexuals" on the front page of a Ugandan newspaper.
Such a publication violates the human rights of the people concerned, including their right to privacy and equal treatment.
The Ugandan state is under an obligation to respect, protect and promote the human rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex people.
The media, too, have a duty to respect human rights.
Uganda's President Museveni yesterday signed into law an Anti-Homosexuality Bill making it a punishable offence to engage in homosexual acts and for activists and organisations to support the human rights of LGBTI people.
One day after the law came into effect, a newspaper published a list of 200 "top homosexuals".
In an article in the Israeli daily newspaper “Yedioth Ahronoth” about the importance of the bilateral intergovernmental talks with Israel, Foreign Minister Steinmeier made it clear that the State of Israel “has a unique connection with Germany”.
Before travelling to Jerusalem, Federal Chancellor Merkel also emphasised that “by virtue of its history” Germany had a responsibility to the State of Israel.
“The State of Israel’s right to exist (is) one of Germany’s fundamental guiding principles.”
In addition to this, Federal Government representatives held bilateral talks.
The Middle East peace process will play an equally “prominent role” in the consultations in Jerusalem, underlined Foreign Minister Steinmeier before the trip.
This arrangement facilitates longer-term holiday stays, including a work permit, for young people between 18 and 30.
Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Liberman signed a text which will enable Israeli nationals in a state of distress abroad to turn to German missions abroad for assistance if Israel does not have a representation of its own where they are.
At their press conference at Midday on Tuesday, Federal Chancellor Merkel said that the agreement was “proof of the trust” within bilateral relations.
The Federal Government supports US Secretary of State John Kerry’s efforts and advocates a two-state solution.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier expressed the hope that the Israeli side would “listen” to Germany’s arguments.
Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Liberman
“Israel is not alone” (published in Yedioth Ahronoth on 23 February)
"Foreign Minister Steinmeier on the German-Israeli intergovernmental consultations"
Externer Link, öffnet in neuem FensterBundesregierung.de on the German-Israeli intergovernmental talks
Bilateral relations between Germany and Israel
A joint German-Israeli jury selected the winning logo, designed by Ariel Wollek and Ticha Matting, from among 18 entries.
on the one hand, the logo’s impact as a bow tie and thus as a symbol of diplomatic relations and on the other, its perception as a symbol of infinity, reflecting the as yet untapped potential of German-Israeli relations.
The Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy has condemned in the strongest possible terms the signing into law of the Anti-Homosexuality Bill in Uganda.
Strässer continued:
Life imprisonment for homosexuality
Crisis in Ukraine:
German, Polish and French Foreign Ministers mediate in Kyiv
Strässer condemns Anti-Homosexuality Law in Uganda
Uganda’s President Museveni signing the controversial law
Christoph Strässer, the Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy, has condemned in the strongest possible terms the signing into law of the Anti-Homosexuality Bill by Uganda's President Yoweri Museveni.
They were sparked by the President’s refusal to sign the association agreement with the EU.
The opposition demonstrators in Independence Square in central Kyiv are now calling for political reform.
When violence erupted last week,
He likewise condemned the publication of a list of Uganda’s “top homosexuals” on the front page of a Ugandan newspaper.
Such a publication violated the human rights of the people concerned, he said, including their right to privacy and equal treatment.
You can read the full statement made by Christoph Strässer here.
Protests against the Anti-Homosexuality law
I call upon the Ugandan state to protect all its citizens against violence, exclusion, discrimination and arbitrary punishment and to abolish all laws that contravene human rights obligations, including the Anti-Homosexuality Bill that was signed yesterday.
Steinmeier, Sikorski and Fabius travelled to Kyiv on 20 February.
On 24 February, Uganda’s President Museveni signed into law an Anti-Homosexuality Bill making it a punishable offence to engage in homosexual acts and for activists and organisations to support the human rights of LGBTI people.
They planned to talk to leading opposition figures, above all Klitschko, Yatsenyuk and Tyahnibok,
One day after the law came into effect, a Ugandan tabloid published a list of 200 “top homosexuals”.
and to President Yanukovych’s government.
The violence continued in Kyiv as the Ministers negotiated.
The Foreign Ministers extended their stay in Kyiv.
Steinmeier and Sikorski talked all night with members of the government and the opposition.
The next morning they were still pushing for an agreement.
Steinmeier and Sikorski even met the “Maidan Council” to urge its members to accept the agreement and support their leaders.
This was a decisive meeting with the opposition.
It was signed in the afternoon by the government and the opposition in the presence of German, French and Polish representatives.
Its terms include the immediate restoration of the 2004 constitution, the formation of a new government, followed by a new constitution and parliamentary elections before the year is out.
But it did seem that the two sides had taken a first step towards each other.
Steinmeier and Sikorski commented as follows after the signing:
In the evening, Foreign Minister Fabius spoke to the press:
Fabius (original soundtrack):
“We have reached an agreement, which naturally does not meet all expectations or wishes.
Sikorski (original soundtrack):
“I am satisfied that it’s the best agreement we could have, that it gives Ukraine a chance to return to peace, to reform and to hopefully resume its way towards Europe.”
Steinmeier:
It was a negotiating marathon that ultimately ended with an agreement:
The protests in Ukraine have been going on for three months.
the Foreign Ministers of Germany, Poland and France decided to jointly offer their good offices to the Ukrainian government and opposition.
Mr Steinmeier, you were involved in the political agreement between the Government and the Opposition in Ukraine.
We sat together and negotiated for more than 20 hours.
President Yanukovych has approved a solution which brings his term of office to an end this year.
Mrs Merkel has also stayed in contact.
In other areas we have not yet succeeded.
Where that is the case, we are continuing to engage in dialogue and trying to find common ground.
I believed that by strengthening Syria’s ties with the west we would perhaps be able to have a greater influence on developments in that country.
Be that as it may, I intend to work to advocate earlier and more decisive engagement with conflicts and to encourage us to get involved where we have the opportunity to make an impact.
This isn’t only about diplomacy or military operations.
As Chancellor, Angela Merkel has been extremely restrained with regard to military operations.
We had a long confidential talk recently.
In the United States the balance between freedom and security is viewed differently than it is in Europe and especially in Germany.
Washington has hopefully understood that the way it treats its partners may also be politically costly.
I am sure that the surveillance of political leaders of friendly states will cease.
I intend to discuss this with Mr Kerry.
The Weimar Triangle Foreign Ministers’ negotiations with government and opposition representatives in Kyiv can be considered “a foundation for the next phase of the process in Ukraine”.
Around 80 people lost their lives.
Against this dramatic background, the negotiations turned into a diplomatic marathon – with no clear outcome.
After 30 hours of negotiations, the agreement stood.
All participants were aware that the road ahead would still be difficult.
But it was perhaps the last chance to avert a further spiralling of violence.”
“Together with my friend Radek Sikorski and Laurent Fabius, I hope that our work here will provide a good foundation for the next phase of the process in Ukraine.”
The Federal Foreign Office runs a global network of more than 230 missions abroad.
Interactive planet
To let you navigate smoothly to the various missions abroad, you are greeted on the start screen by a three-dimensional globe.
Setting favourites
Once you have located your embassy or consulate, a simple tap will let you save it to your favourites so that you can access it later straight from the start screen.
Advice issued by missions abroad
From the globe screen, you also have the option of switching directly to the “Hinweise der Vertretungen” page, where you can see at a glance which embassies and consulates currently have tips or warnings posted.
Please note that the FFO has another app, “Sicher reisen”, especially for travel and security advice.
The latest news, information, addresses and opening hours
Now you can see what your selected missions have posted: topical articles, photo galleries and current videos.
You will also find all the important contact details collated here (addresses, opening times, etc).
The app is free and available for download here:
Its interactive and informative app provides quick, easy access to the latest information from the FFO and its embassies and consulates, at any time, wherever you are.
Federal Foreign Office app: “Auswärtiges Amt – Auslandsvertretungen weltweit”
continuing support for Syria’s moderate opposition forces
At the Federal Foreign Office today (26 February 2014), Foreign Minister Steinmeier met Ahmed Tomeh, Prime Minister of the Syrian National Coalition’s interim Government.
Their discussions focused on ways of boosting humanitarian aid following the UN Security Council resolution adopted last Saturday, reconstruction in the areas controlled by Syria’s opposition forces, and the great importance of continuing the Geneva peace talks.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier made the following statement after the meeting:
Along with the more than one hundred members of the Group of Friends of the Syrian People, the German Government has recognised the National Coalition as the legitimate representatives of the Syrian people.
The Assad regime stands urgently called upon to implement the clear stipulations of the UN resolution and immediately grant full humanitarian access to the conflict areas.
Germany will continue doing all we can in our humanitarian efforts for the people in need in Syria today.
I spoke to Prime Minister Tomeh today about how we can deliver our assistance most effectively.
We will be maintaining our support for Syria’s moderate opposition forces.
One of the means we have of doing this is the trust fund Germany has set up, which now contains over 50 million euros and is used directly for relief projects in the areas controlled by the moderate opposition.
I am glad that Japan has marked the occasion of Prime Minister Tomeh’s visit to Berlin today by becoming the fund’s newest international contributor, providing 10 million euros.
Prime Minister Tomeh was accompanied on his visit to the Federal Foreign Office by Taghrid Al-Hajali, Minister of Culture and Family, Ibrahim Miro, Minister of Finance, Elias Wardeh, Minister of Energy and Mineral Wealth, and Iyad Qudsi, Vice Prime Minister.
The German Government established the Syria Recovery Trust Fund in collaboration with the United Arab Emirates.
It is administered by Germany’s KfW (Reconstruction Loan Corporation).
Foreign Minister Lajčák in the Federal Foreign Office
Foreign Minister Steinmeier with his Slovakian counterpart Lajčák
Foreign Minister Steinmeier received his Slovakian counterpart Lajčák:
alongside bilateral relations, the meeting focused primarily on European issues and current international developments, in which the situation in the EU’s Eastern Partnership took priority.
“We will be maintaining our support for Syria’s moderate opposition forces”
At a meeting with members of the interim Government of the Syrian National Coalition, Foreign Minister Steinmeier reaffirmed Germany’s support for the people of Syria.
“We will be maintaining our support for Syria’s moderate opposition forces”
Germany keeping up its humanitarian efforts
The representatives of the interim Government spoke to Foreign Minister Steinmeier about ways of boosting humanitarian aid following the UN Security Council resolution adopted last Saturday.
Further key topics were reconstruction in the areas controlled by Syria’s opposition forces and the essential importance of continuing the Geneva peace talks.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier made the following statement after the meeting:
Japan joins the trust fund for Syria:
Japanese Ambassador Takeshi Nakane with KfW representative Stefan Zeeb
Japan joins Syria Recovery Trust Fund
Foreign Minister Steinmeier welcoming members of the Syrian National Coalition’s interim Government
The National Coalition of the Syrian Opposition decides how the money is allocated to particular reconstruction projects.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier met Ahmed Tomeh, Prime Minister of the Syrian National Coalition’s interim Government, at the Federal Foreign Office on Wednesday (26 February 2014).
Speech given at the German Ambassador’s reception
for the heads of German implementing organisations and
international aid organisations
Thank you for the wonderful reception and for giving me the opportunity this evening to talk to you and your guests about your experiences in Jordan.
I only arrived in Jordan yesterday evening and cannot claim that I now know the country in which you have all surely been working for some time.
Moreover, I have not travelled here with UNICEF in order to explore the country, wonderful though it undoubtedly is.
I am here for a sadder reason –
Yet it is something quite different to see the situation for yourself.
The aim of my trip is, as UNICEF Patron, to gain an insight into and first-hand view of
Jordan, as one of the countries most affected by the tremendous influx of refugees from Syria,
the huge effort that Jordan has been forced to make to deal with this challenge and
This is the only way for me to be able to give an accurate report of the refugees’ situation back in Germany.
I would like to help to make the citizens of Germany aware of their terrible suffering and unbearable fate.
Therefore my trip also aims to strengthen public awareness about the catastrophic situation and equally, to make Germans more prepared to make donations.
Today I was able to gain an initial impression when I visited some host communities.
Tomorrow I will visit the refugee camp Za’atari with UNICEF.
I am sure that the experience will be just as moving as today’s visit was.
In order to gain a fully-rounded view of the situation of Syrian refugees in Jordan I would also like to learn about the other international and German aid organisations that are working here.
Please do not hesitate to come and talk to me, I would be very grateful to hear what you have to say.
I would like to thank you all for the work that you are doing for Germany here, in a wide range of places, in Jordan.
I would also like to thank the representatives of the international aid organisations.
Today I saw but a sliver of what you are confronted with on a daily basis.
I wish you continued stamina and above all many small, and hopefully also some large, success stories in the important contribution that you are making to tackling this catastrophic situation.
“Auswärtiges Amt – Auslandsvertretungen weltweit”: the app for finding German missions abroad on all standard mobile devices
Rotate the globe and zoom in on the embassy or consulate you are looking for, or get an idea of how Germany’s missions are distributed across a particular region.
Download for Android smartphones and tablets  Download for iPhones and iPads
Quick, easy access to the latest information from the Federal Foreign Office and its embassies and consulates, at any time, wherever you are
in Amman on 1 March 2014
Mr Ambassador,
around 5.5 million Syrian children and young people have been directly affected by the civil war in Syria.
4.3 million of them live in Syria – many in emergency shelters and overcrowded apartments.
Around 1.2 million children live in refugee camps or improvised accommodation in Jordan, Lebanon, Iraq and Turkey.
It is one thing to have these unbelievable figures before your eyes, to read or watch reports and accounts, or to talk to people who have personally experienced this humanitarian catastrophe.
how the Syrian refugees are coping – above all, the children amongst them.
It is important to me to talk to people on the ground.
Mr Tarraf is the Ambassador of the Federal Republic of Germany.
But our country is also represented by all of you in your fields of activity.
I wish you a sure hand in continuing your work.
Yet even this brief glimpse was enough to instil the utmost respect in me for the work that you are doing.
I look forward to meeting you and to speaking to you in person!
“The new Government in Kyiv has to make sure it is there for all the people of Ukraine”
Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement in Washington today (27 February) prior to his meeting with US Secretary of State John Kerry:
Foreign Minister Steinmeier meets representatives from humanitarian agencies
This is my fourth time seeing Secretary of State Kerry since I took office not that long ago.
Ukraine is one of those challenges.
Prime Minister Yatsenyuk has a lot of work ahead of him.
Dedicated to humanitarian assistance
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier met representatives of German humanitarian agencies in Berlin for talks on 26 February.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier with representatives of German humanitarian agencies
Through our dialogue with aid organisations we seek to work with them in a spirit of partnership to make German humanitarian assistance more effective in the face of ever greater challenges.
Through our dialogue with aid organisations we seek to work with them in a spirit of partnership to make German humanitarian assistance more effective in the face of the ever greater challenges posed by increasingly frequent natural disasters and crises.
It will be no easy task, neither in terms of the state of Ukraine’s finances nor with respect to the still turbulent political situation.
The important thing now is for the new Government to ensure and prove that it is a Government for all the people of Ukraine, for the North, South, East and West, and to work with international institutions and the country’s neighbours to restore financial stability.
I will be talking about that with the Americans today, and with the IMF tomorrow.
We are also in discussions with Russia on the same subject.
East and West should not quarrel about Ukraine’s future.
What matters now is that everyone should do their bit to support that path.
The meeting at the Federal Foreign Office in Berlin was attended by organisations including the German section of Médecins sans Frontières, Caritas International, the German Red Cross, Welthungerhilfe, Diakonie Katastrophenhilfe, Johanniter International Assistance, Malteser International and the Association of German Development NGOs (Venro).
Humanitarian aid in the Syrian crisis
It is important, before anything else, to have the IMF very swiftly send a group of experts to Kyiv to assess the needs of the financial situation.
Ms Lagarde has already announced that this will happen, which I am very happy about.
The European Union is doing so, and, from what I have seen and heard, the US Government is prepared to make assistance available too.
Germany is the third largest donor of humanitarian aid in the Syrian conflict.
If these four partners could pull together on the vital financial stabilisation, it would be a good start.
Click for more information about German humanitarian assistance.
The work of German aid organisations is indispensable if Germany is to take a responsible part in international humanitarian assistance.
It is precisely in such situations that German aid organisations are able to gain access to the people in need, something which is often denied to other parties.
No-one can know just how great Ukraine’s financial needs are, as not even the new Government has had a chance to really go through the books.
I think the first move now must be to organise transitional funding, and then investigate the fiscal requirements step by step for the long term.
Child labour in India
Germany's human rights policy has a very concrete goal:
to prevent human rights abuses and protect fundamental freedoms.
Respect for and development of human rights
Respect for and development of human rights are a key priority for the German Government.
This means that Germany has an obligation to respect human dignity and protect fundamental freedoms not only in Germany but throughout the world.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier in Washington
Principles of German human rights policy
The main focus of the two-day visit will be talks on the state of transatlantic relations and the current situation in Ukraine.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier arrived in the US capital Washington on Thursday (27 February), where he had a meeting with his counterpart John Kerry.
On Friday he will be meeting the Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), Christine Lagarde.
Their talks will concentrate on bilateral relations and current international issues.
On Friday Germany's Foreign Minister will also be giving an address on transatlantic relations at the Brookings Institution, a respected US think-tank.
Arriving in Washington
Following his arrival in Washington, D.C. on Thursday morning (local time), Foreign Minister Steinmeier headed straight to the Department of State, where he had lunch with his counterpart, Secretary of State John Kerry.
Everyone has these rights, irrespective of their background, age, gender, religion, colour or any other attribute.
It goes to show that international challenges have been giving us a lot to do over recent days and weeks.
I am pleased that, as we had called for, a Government has been formed quickly that can now start work.
On the contrary, all of Ukraine’s neighbours and everyone who has sympathy for its people seeing what they have gone through in recent weeks and months now need to help Ukraine towards a stable future.
We are also talking to Russia about not withdrawing or cancelling relief funds it has pledged.
Ukraine mustn’t run out of steam now in this interim phase.
Advancing universal respect for human rights requires attention to the whole spectrum of civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights.
Protecting and advancing the whole spectrum of human rights, on the other hand, promotes peace and development and helps people develop their potential.
For only then will our stance on human rights around the world remain credible.
On our homeground, too, it is important to monitor how effectively we protect human rights in practice.
This is done in a variety of ways, ranging from human rights dialogues, demarches, public statements and behind-the-scenes diplomacy to project activities and public relations work in specific regions.
Political and financial stability for Ukraine
These challenges included the current situation in Ukraine.
The new Government under Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk had a huge amount of work to do, the Minister said.
It had to prove that it was a Government for all Ukrainians and that it was working to bring the country political and financial stability.
Steinmeier said he wanted to discuss the latter with the Americans and with the IMF.
The German Foreign Minister went on to say:
With the Commissioner for Human Rights, a post instituted in 1999, the Council of Europe has a further important instrument for reviewing the human rights situation in Europe.
I will moreover have the opportunity tomorrow morning to speak to her about the IMF’s readiness to provide emergency assistance.
Intensive talks in Washington
The two Foreign Ministers quickly got on to the subject of Ukraine at their joint press conference after their intensive talks as well.
Kerry thanked Steinmeier for his mediation in Kyiv as part of the Weimar Triangle last week and called on Russia to take a constructive role in stabilising Ukraine.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier too emphasised the international community's shared responsibility for the country:
Ukraine needs breathing space now to attain political and economic stability.
That means that the EU, US, IMF and hopefully also Russia must together ensure that Ukraine receives the financial assistance it needs.
Relationship between freedom and security
Steinmeier and Kerry at their joint press conference
Transatlantic relations were a key topic in the Ministers' talks.
Kerry stressed that the two men had had a frank and constructive conversation which also touched on the tensions between the two countries following the NSA surveillance affair.
He went on to say that it was intended to set up a cyberdialogue that day as a forum for this debate, enabling "differences and similarities in our attitudes to protecting privacy" to be defined.
In an interview with the Spiegel news magazine on 23 February Steinmeier had emphasised that Europeans and Americans had very different ideas about data protection:
Other subjects discussed by Steinmeier and Kerry included the nuclear negotiations with Iran and the conflict in Syria.
Following his meeting with Secretary of State Kerry, Foreign Minister Steinmeier met Senator Bob Corker on Thursday afternoon.
In the evening there was a dinner in the German Ambassador's residence with Senator Dianne Feinstein.
Following talks with IMF Managing Director Christine Lagarde about financial support for Ukraine, the German Foreign Minister will give an address at the Brookings Institution.
German aid organisations are reliable and get things done, and thanks to their long years in the field, they have developed considerable and varied expertise in organising emergency assistance in crises and conflicts, such as that in Syria.
Since 2012, Germany has spent 244 million euros to help the people affected by the crisis.
Bilateral relations between Germany and the United States
Spiegel interview with Foreign Minister Steinmeier (23 February)
US Secretary of State Kerry visits Berlin (3 February)
Through the inclusion of a reference to it in the Treaty of Lisbon, the Charter achieved the status of law when the Treaty itself entered into force.
Fundamental rights – a foundation for Europe
Human Rights in the United Nations
Girl carpet maker in Afghanistan
Prior to the meeting, Steinmeier said the fact that he was meeting Kerry for the fourth time in the relatively short period since taking up office showed that there had been much to do in recent weeks and months to tackle the international challenges.
It is important, above all else, to have the IMF very swiftly send a group of experts to Kyiv to assess the needs of the financial situation.
Steinmeier pointed out that the US and Germany had differing understandings of the relationship between freedom and security, but at least the debate was no longer being carried out by the media, but directly between Government, academia and civil society in the two countries.
That has a lot to do with the experiences from our history.
Transatlantic ties will be the focus of Steinmeier’s talks on Friday as well.
“We aren’t out of the woods yet.”:
His speech at this respected US think-tank is entitled "Transatlantic Ties for a New Generation: Why They Are Important and What We Need To Do About Them". It will highlight Germany’s commitment to making transatlantic relations fit for the future and show the way from a value-based dialogue to the practical application of shared values in the 21st century.
To this end it cooperates closely and regularly with UN institutions, in particular the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in Geneva.
Both fora are concerned with the human rights situation around the world and the development of additional legal instruments and programmes designed to promote human rights.
They discuss and adopt resolutions on human rights issues, which notably civil society actors can find very helpful for their work on the ground.
The HRC has a wide-ranging mandate to deal with human rights issues.
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
Germany is a party to all major UN human rights conventions and their supplementary protocols.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier launches Review 2014 – A Fresh Look at German Foreign Policy
These human rights conventions and their related protocols create legal obligations that are directly binding on all parties.
After examining these reports, the committees then publish their findings.
This reporting process serves to identify deficits in a given country and indicate what concrete measures could improve human rights protection there.
Common Core Document of the Federal Republic of Germany
Dialogue with civil society
We therefore actively seek dialogue with groups and individuals working on human rights issues. This kind of civil society dialogue complements the dialogues we have at intergovernmental level.
A German-language collection of important UN and European human rights documents and declarations, as well as further documents on regional protection of human rights, can be obtained for a fee from the Federal Agency for Civil Education at www.bpb.de.
Since the end of the Cold War, globalisation and the rise of new powers have led to a “new obscurity” in international politics.
What does this mean for German and European foreign policy?
All too often, though, we have not been finding the right way to deal with them.
All too often, we stick to our habitual, familiar procedures, in international politics the same as anywhere else.
That should change.
It is for that reason that I launched Review 2014 – A Fresh Look at German Foreign Policy today.
Review 2014 – A Fresh Look at Foreign Policy is a project intended to spark public debate about the conditions and prospects of Germany’s international relations and, in that context, to review the work of the Federal Foreign Office.
The project is deliberately set up in such a way as to allow a broad dialogue with the public and civil society, in order to gain ideas and insights from outwith the usual interministerial discussion.
If we are to be able to take effective action on the world stage, we need to have an understanding here in Germany of the value and the tools of diplomacy.
The focus is on the point, the objective and the instruments of foreign policy today.
The project will start with recognised experts from Germany and elsewhere critically examining Germany’s foreign policy.
In summer and autumn, events in various German cities will see representatives of civil society debate contested international issues.
The experts’ texts and the events will be published and managed via a specially created website.
The internal discussion at the Federal Foreign Office will follow on from there.
The projects outcomes will be published in early 2015.
Responsibility for the project Review 2014 – A Fresh Look at German Foreign Policy lies with the Policy Planning Staff of the Federal Foreign Office.
Christoph Bertram, former director of SWP – German Institute for International and Security Affairs, is advising them.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier on the situation in the Crimea:
The main focus of the two-day visit was talks on the state of transatlantic relations and the current situation in Ukraine.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier concluded his two-day visit to the US capital Washington on Friday evening (28 February).
Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement in Berlin today (2 March) on the current situation in Ukraine:
The Federal Government is observing recent developments with concern.
We are on an extremely dangerous path of escalating tensions.
A change of course is still possible.
Federal Foreign Minister Steinmeier is in close consultation with his European and international partners.
There is still a chance of stopping Europe being split.
The main focus of his talks, including with US Secretary of State John Kerry and the Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), Christine Lagarde, was on bilateral relations and current international issues.
To do so, all those responsible need to refrain from taking any further steps which can only be interpreted as provocation.
Following his arrival in Washington, D.C. on Thursday morning (local time), Foreign Minister Steinmeier headed first to the Department of State, where he had lunch with his counterpart, Secretary of State John Kerry.
These challenges include the current situation in Ukraine.
Steinmeier stressed that the new Government under Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk had a huge amount of work to do.
Anything else would cause the situation to spiral, with uncertain, possibly drastic consequences, and could destroy many years of constructive cooperation on increasing security in Europe.
Ukraine needs breathing space now to attain political and economic stability.
That means that the EU, US, IMF and hopefully also Russia must together ensure that Ukraine receives the financial assistance it needs.
Russia has no right to deploy its military in Ukrainian territory beyond the rules of the lease agreement on Russia’s Black Sea Fleet.
We call on Russia with all urgency to refrain from any violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Trade and economic relations between Moscow and Kyiv were so dense, the Minister said, that Russia had a heightened interest in stabilising Ukraine.
change of course still possible, stop Europe being split
We are actively advocating that the new political leaders in Kyiv protect the rights and interests of all the people of Ukraine.
This particularly involves unequivocal protection of minority rights, including use of minority languages.
The OSCE, and notably its High Commissioner on National Minorities, can play an important role here.
Minister of State Böhmer is the German representative in the Open Working Group.
Concern about the situation in Crimea
Steinmeier addresses the Brookings Institution
On Saturday morning (1 March) Federal Chancellor Angela Merkel also commented on the situation in Ukraine during a joint event with EU Commission President Manuel Barroso, stating:
Sustainable development goals: Minister of State Böhmer travels to New York
Foreign Minister Steinmeier appealed to Russia to respect Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Russia must provide transparency without delay
Close coordination among European partners
following the demand of Foreign Minister Steinmeier that the European foreign ministers meet urgently to agree on a united stance for the European Union.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier concerned about dangerous developments in Ukraine
Foreign Minister Steinmeier has appealed to political leaders to work to prevent further escalation of the situation.
On Saturday (1 March) Foreign Minister Steinmeier stated with regard to the tense situation in Crimea and other regions of Ukraine that escalation of the conflict was in no one’s interests.
He went on to say that political leaders nonetheless still had the chance to prevent further deterioration of the situation and the possibility of unforeseeable consequences.
On this occasion the German Chancellor also stressed that she was maintaining telephone contact with Russian President Vladimir Putin in connection with the developments in Ukraine.
That is the question that Review 2014 – A Fresh Look at German Foreign Policy aims to explore in a broad public debate.
Foreign policy, as the Federal President admonished in his Munich speech, should be a matter for reflection in the heart of society.
China: There can be no justification for the attack in Kunming
There can be no justification for this crime.
Our sympathy goes out to the families of the many victims.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier on the current situation in Crimea
Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement in Berlin today (1 March) on the situation in Ukraine:
These are dangerous developments that we have seen in Ukraine over the last few hours.
It is in my view essential that we in Europe meet urgently to agree on a united stance for the European Union.
At the Brookings Institution, a respected US think-tank, Steinmeier gave an address on transatlantic ties in the 21st century.
Above all, the Minister said, it was important that the IMF quickly send a group of experts to Kyiv to assess the country’s financial needs.
The German Foreign Minister, too, emphasised the international community’s shared responsibility for the country:
Getting lots of partners round one table
At a working breakfast with IMF Managing Director Christine Lagarde on Friday morning, the main topic was again the crisis in Ukraine.
Lagarde warned against panic-mongering with regard to the country’s financial situation.
At the same time, she said that a team of experts would be travelling to Kyiv this coming week to establish the facts and prepare the ground for a possible aid programme.
Steinmeier again emphasised that stabilising the situation in Ukraine meant getting “as many partners as possible round one table”. This included Russia, he went on.
The second key issue during Steinmeier’s two-day trip to the US was the transatlantic relationship.
The talks between the two Foreign Ministers, which John Kerry subsequently described as candid and constructive, also touched on the tensions between the two countries following the NSA surveillance affair.
A cyber dialogue is to be established as a forum for this debate, enabling “differences and similarities in our attitudes to protecting privacy” to be defined.
Transatlantic relations in the 21st century
Bilateral relations between Germany and the United States were also the main topic of the speech made by the German Foreign Minister at the Brookings Institution, a respected US think-tank.
On Friday morning, Steinmeier spoke to a sizable audience, including many American and German students, about the future shape of transatlantic ties, underlining the importance of the practical application of shared values in the 21st century.
Only if we transpose our shared values to today’s problems will younger people be interested in our transatlantic partnership.
Steinmeier and Podesta in the German Ambassador’s residence in Washington
During his time in the US capital, Steinmeier also had the opportunity to meet US Senators Bob Corker and Dianne Feinstein, as well as presidential adviser John Podesta.
Shortly before departing Washington on Friday afternoon, the Minister had another appointment, at the White House: while President Barack Obama was giving a statement on reports about Russian soldiers being deployed in the Ukrainian peninsula Crimea, Steinmeier was meeting his National Security Adviser, Susan Rice, a few doors along the corridor.
Speech by Foreign Minister Steinmeier at the Brookings Institution in Washington, D.C.: “Transatlantic Ties for a New Generation”
“We’re not out of the woods yet”: Spiegel interview with Foreign Minister Steinmeier (23 February)
Tensions in Ukraine’s Crimean peninsula have increased dramatically.
Tensions in Ukraine’s Crimean peninsula have now increased further.
The German Foreign Minister has urgently called the political leaders to work to prevent further escalation of the situation.
On Monday (3 March) the EU foreign ministers will gather in Brussels at the invitation of EU High Representative Catherine Ashton for a special meeting on the situation in Ukraine.
On Monday (3 March) the EU foreign ministers will gather in Brussels at the invitation of EU High Representative Ashton to discuss the situation in Ukraine,
He added that this now obliged Russia to provide “full transparency, not only with regard to the movements of its troops in Crimea, but also for its goals and intentions behind this activity”.
Minister of State Böhmer will also meet Jan Eliasson, Deputy UN Secretary-General.
Tensions have increased dramatically, especially in Crimea.
Anyone who now adds fuel to the fire, be it with words or with actions, is deliberately seeking to stir up tensions.
It is in no-one’s interest for the conflict to escalate.
Political leaders still have the chance to prevent further deterioration of the situation and the possibility of unforeseeable consequences.
Everything Russia does on the Crimean peninsula must be fully in keeping with Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, and with the agreements concerning Russia’s Black Sea Fleet.
We hold the Russian Government to its public assurances on this issue.
We are liaising closely with our partners on this matter.
Combating torture
Bild: Tuol Sleng Museum in Phnom Penh
The German Government’s engagement in the fight against torture and abuse is resolute and untiring.
These oblige Russia to provide full transparency, not only with regard to the movements of its troops in Crimea, but also for its goals and intentions behind this activity.
Together with its EU partners, it is striving to strengthen the international mechanisms to combat torture.
It attaches paramount importance to the worldwide abolition of torture as well as the complete rehabilitation of torture victims.
UN Convention against Torture
Germany ratified the UN Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment of 10 December 1984, to which 153 states have now acceded, on 1 November 1990.
The German Government is calling for the largest possible number of accessions to this Convention.
Compliance with the UN Convention against Torture by the States parties is subject to strict international control.
The States parties must submit regular reports to the UN Committee against Torture on the national measures they have taken to comply with the Convention.
The Committee responds with recommendations aimed at improving the situation in individual countries.
Germany has now submitted its fifth country report.
A round table was held at the German Institute for Human Rights on 23 May 2012 to examine the recommendations made by the Committee.
More than 40 representatives from federal and Land ministries, the Bundestag, the world of politics, academia, civil society, the National Agency for the Prevention of Torture and the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees took part.
Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture
The adoption of the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture by the UN General Assembly on 18 December 2002 represented a major step forward in the global fight against torture.
The Protocol, which entered into force on 22 June 2006 and has now been ratified by 59 states, provides for the establishment of national and international mechanisms which are intended to have an early preventative impact.
By ratifying the Optional Protocol, states undertake to establish independent bodies at national level which must be granted unrestricted access to detention facilities.
In Germany, where the Protocol has been in force since 3 January 2009, the Federal Agency for the Prevention of Torture was established for this purpose. The Agency began work on 1 May 2009.
A separate Länder Commission for the Prevention of Torture has been established for institutions which fall under the jurisdiction of the Länder.
Together, the Federal Agency and the Länder Commission form the National Agency for the Prevention of Torture, Germany’s prevention mechanism under the Optional Protocol.
The National Agency is an independent body, annexed to the German Institute of Criminology, a research institute of the Federation and Länder, in Wiesbaden.
The National Agency’s task is to visit Federal detention facilities (such as Bundeswehr and Federal Police facilities) and Länder detention facilities (such as prisons, police stations and psychiatric hospitals) on a regular basis and unannounced, to point out shortcomings and issue recommendations.
It is also required to report to the Bundestag, the Länder parliaments, and the Federal and Länder Governments on its activities.
It does not process inquiries or complaints from individuals.
In addition to national agencies, the Optional Protocol also provides for an international monitoring mechanism, the UN Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture.
The German Government actively supported the candidature of a German expert for a seat on this body.
The Subcommittee visited Germany in April 2013.
UN Special Rapporteur on Torture
The special rapporteurs are an important UN instrument for protecting and promoting human rights.
Their mandate includes observing the situation in the States parties, visits and reports, as well as recommendations.
The special rapporteurs rely on receiving an invitation from the state in question.
Germany has issued a standing invitation to all UN special rapporteurs.
In Resolution 1985/33, the UN Commission on Human Rights appointed a special rapporteur to examine all issues relevant to torture.
His mandate covers all countries, irrespective of whether a State has (yet) ratified the Convention against Torture.
Juan Ernesto Méndez, an Argentinean legal expert who promotes human rights and is engaged in the efforts to combat torture and genocide, has held this mandate since 1 November 2010.
EU guidelines on torture
With the adoption of the guidelines for EU policy towards third countries on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment or treatment on 9 April 2001, the EU created an instrument which strengthened its commitment to the worldwide abolition of torture.
A jointly developed global action plan, whose key points were implemented during Germany’s EU Presidency, consisted of numerous demarches in third states in which the EU addressed the problem of the use of torture and called for its abolition.
The EU guidelines also help ensure that the fight against torture and its abolition is a fixture in dialogues with third states which the EU conducts as an organisation and the member states at bilateral level.
The German Government, too, is obliged to adhere to the EU guidelines in its actions.
The focus is on individual cases.
European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
The Council of Europe also has a convention against torture:
the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, which entered into force on 1 February 1989.
To implement the Convention, the Council of Europe established the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture, which comprises independent experts.
The task of this Committee is to review the human rights situation of individuals in States parties who have been deprived of their freedom.
To this end, visits are made to prisons, psychiatric institutions and other establishments in which people are detained.
A Federal Foreign Office spokesperson issued the following statement in Berlin today (2 March) on the attack at a railway station in Kunming, the capital of Yunnan province in South-West China, which left more than 30 people dead.
We condemn this brutal attack on innocent civilians at a railway station in Kunming, South-West China, in the strongest possible terms.
The reports on these visits, which contain concrete recommendations for action, are published with the consent of the state in question. The Committee’s last visit to Germany took place at the end of 2013.
Human rights relate to every field of government policy.
Human rights abuses are not just cruel. They also threaten international stability and security and within countries they undermine economic and social progress.
Germany has signed up to nearly all UN human rights conventions as well as all core European human rights norms.
In 2001 the German Institute for Human Rights was established with a mandate to monitor implementation of human rights conventions and educate people about human rights.
Responsibility for Germany’s human rights policy lies with the Federal Foreign Office's Task Force for Human Rights.
The Task Force works together with their country division colleagues and Christoph Strässer, the Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid at the Federal Foreign Office, to advance human rights protection around the world.
The success of these activities also depends greatly on ongoing contacts with the informed public and non-governmental organisations.
The only basis on which lasting progress can be achieved internationally, is mutual respect. The Task Force for Human Rights and the Commissioner for Human Rights therefore attach great importance to dialogue and cooperation with partners from civil society, business and politics.
Human rights in Europe
European Court of Human Rights
The Council of Europe, which was founded in 1949 and whose members include 47 of Europe's now 49 countries, plays a crucial role in protecting human rights there.
For Europe's 800 million citizens their last resort in human rights matters is the European Court of Human Rights, by whose decisions all Council of Europe members have agreed to be bound.
Like the Council of Europe, the OSCE is also engaged in the process of building a democratic Europe committed to the rule of law and the protection of human rights.
Back in 1999 the German Government had successfully proposed the drawing up of an EU Charter of Fundamental Rights.
Together with its EU partners, the German Government works hard in the United Nations to protect and further develop human rights standards.
Key UN fora here are the regular meetings of the new Human Rights Council (HRC, successor to the Commission on Human Rights) in Geneva and the meetings of the Third Committee of the UN General Assembly every autumn in New York.
The Federal Republic of Germany served on the former Commission on Human Rights without interruption from 1979 until its demise.
In 2006 Germany was elected to the new Human Rights Council with the highest number of votes within the western group (which comprises 47 countries).
Since 1 January 2013 Germany is once again a member of the HRC and will stand for a further term in 2016-2017.
Most recently it signed the supplementary protocol to the Convention against Torture as well as the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. It is currently preparing the ratification of the supplementary protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, which provides for the introduction of a communications procedure.
Countries that have signed up to them are required to submit to independent committees of experts so-called country reports detailing how they have implemented the conventions in question.
The Common Core Document is the primary document the committees rely on here, which in Germany is compiled under the direction of the Federal Ministry of Justice. It contains data on the country and its population, history, form of government and state structures and, most importantly, information on the general legal framework for the protection of human rights as well as a wealth of statistical data, thus making comparisons with other countries possible.
Keen public interest in protecting and advancing human rights is something that Germany believes is very important for the success of our efforts in this area.
Federal President to travel to Greece on state visit in March
Reports relating to Germany by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture
Federal President Joachim Gauck and his partner, Daniela Schadt, will be on a state visit to the Hellenic Republic from 5 to 7 March 2014.
The focus in Athens will be on talks with President Karolos Papoulias, Prime Minister Antonis Samaras, Parliamentary Speaker Evangelos Meimarakis and a number of members of parliament.
Federal President Gauck will also be meeting Greek intellectuals, finding out about dual vocation training projects and giving a speech at the Acropolis museum.
He will then travel on with President Papoulias to his host’s home region, Epirus.
The two Presidents will visit the village of Lingiades, where Wehrmacht soldiers carried out a massacre during the Second World War.
In the region’s capital, Ioannina, they will pay a visit to the Jewish community.
25 March 2014 marks 70 years to the day since the Jewish population of Ioannina was deported to Auschwitz.
This visit by the Federal President underlines the significance of relations with Greece, which holds the Presidency of the EU Council for the first half of 2014.
In his speech at the Acropolis museum in Athens, the Federal President will be talking about Europe as our heritage and our future.
In January 2014, Dr Margarete Osterfeld succeeded Prof. Christian Pross as German expert on the UN Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture.
Talks on Ukraine in Brussels and Geneva
On Monday (3 March) the European Union foreign ministers met in Brussels.
Following this meeting Foreign Minister Steinmeier flew to Geneva for talks with Russia’s Foreign Minister Lavrov.
Following the meeting Foreign Minister Steinmeier flew on to Geneva for talks with his Russian counterpart Lavrov.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier in Brussels (3 March 2014)
adding that the situation in Ukraine was becoming more tense by the day.
Time for crisis diplomacy
Demonstrations in Brussels (3 March 2014)
Speaking in Brussels, Steinmeier stressed, “Crisis diplomacy is not a sign of weakness.”
Germany is therefore doing everything in its power to find a diplomatic solution for calming the situation in Ukraine.
The focus is on the Crimean peninsula, where the situation is currently hard to monitor and pro-Russian armed forces have been deployed.
Dialogue with Russia necessary
For that reason, Steinmeier said, it was important for Europe – alongside the strong messages it was sending to Russia – to encourage the two governments in Russia and Ukraine to talk directly to one another.
“That could help reduce tensions.”
He explained that the key was to find formats which would bring both parties together.
There is no guarantee that tools like this will provide us with a way out of the crisis and really help to defuse the situation.
Meeting with Lavrov at short notice
Talking with French Foreign Minister Fabius
Talking with Russia’s Foreign Minister Lavrov
In the evening Foreign Minister Steinmeier travelled from Brussels to Geneva, where he met his Russian counterpart at short notice for a working dinner.
The two ministers discussed the situation in Ukraine.
Before leaving Brussels, Steinmeier announced that they, too, would discuss options for resolving the conflict in Ukraine.
In the days to come we must ensure that we remain capable of taking political action.”
In Brussels, Foreign Minister Steinmeier therefore proposed making an objective assessment of the situation.
Twenty-five years after the end of the Cold War, the danger of a new rift in Europe is very real,” he continued,
Speaking in Brussels, where the EU foreign ministers gathered for an emergency meeting at midday on Monday, Foreign Minister Steinmeier stated, “Without a doubt Europe is facing its severest crisis since the fall of the Wall.
He emphasised that “a clear message is needed.
“In the past we have had good experiences with international contact groups, which can involve many players, including the Europeans.”
“There are no guarantees.
But I believe it would be irresponsible not to try.”
A meeting between Steinmeier and United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon is scheduled for tomorrow (4 March) in Geneva.
Text for Foreign Minister’s trip to Washington
Their talks focused primarily on transatlantic relations and the situation in Ukraine.
where he meets his opposite number, John Kerry.
transatlantic relations and the situation in Ukraine.
German-American relations are currently tainted by the surveillance affair involving the US intelligence service NSA.
In this context Steinmeier remarks:
We have realised that our perception of the relationship between freedom and security is different, and we have to discuss this relationship seriously.
With regard to the situation in Ukraine, Secretary of State Kerry thanks his German colleague for his engagement in the mediation efforts in Kyiv.
Steinmeier warns that a rift could split the country:
The main goal must be to preserve Ukraine’s territorial integrity.
If that were to be tampered with, we would sow new seeds of unrest in the region.
We cannot, we must not allow that to happen.
After sharing a working breakfast, she agrees to send a team of experts to Kyiv in the coming week to prepare the ground for a possible aid programme.
And then the talks turn once again to relations between Germany and the United States:
Many young people are in the audience.
Steinmeier addresses them directly:
Bright sunshine and a bracing February wind greet the German Foreign Minister on his first trip to the United States since resuming office.
Federal Foreign Minister Steinmeier meets Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov and UN Secretary General Ban in Geneva for crisis talks.
Yesterday (3 March) the EU foreign ministers met in Brussels.
Federal Foreign Minister Steinmeier met Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov and UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon in Geneva for talks on the crisis in Ukraine.
The European Union foreign ministers met in Brussels on Monday (3 March),
where they discussed how to prevent further escalation of the Crimea crisis.
“Statements and debates will not lift us out of the current crisis.
Meeting with Ban Ki-moon and Lavrov
In the evening of 3 March Foreign Minister Steinmeier travelled from Brussels to Geneva, where he met his Russian counterpart at short notice for a working dinner.
Over a working breakfast in Geneva the two men also discussed ways to resolve the conflict in Ukraine.
In the course of the day Foreign Minister Steinmeier will also meet Swiss President Didier Burkhalter,
who is currently Chair of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE).
They will discuss a possible OSCE observer mission in Ukraine.
During his two-day visit to the US capital, Frank-Walter Steinmeier met his opposite number John Kerry and the Head of the IMF Christine Lagarde.
After landing, Frank-Walter Steinmeier goes directly to the State Department, the United States’ Foreign Ministry,
Their talks focus on two issues which will also dominate the rest of the German Foreign Minister’s visit to the United States:
A so-called cyber dialogue is to be established as a forum for the debate, enabling differences and similarities in attitudes to protecting privacy to be defined.
Next morning, in the residence of the German Ambassador, Ukraine is the subject under discussion again – the focus this time on financial support:
Steinmeier meets IMF Head Christine Lagarde
At the Brookings Institution, a prestigious US think-tank, Foreign Minister Steinmeier gives a lecture on transatlantic relations and shared values in the 21 st century.
Only if we put our values to work on the questions of today will young people care about our partnership.
In the afternoon the German Foreign Minister has an appointment with Susan Rice, Security Advisor to the US President, at the White House, before flying back to Berlin.
“A clear message is needed,” emphasised the German Foreign Minister, who also had talks with his French colleague Laurent Fabius on the fringes of the EU's ministers meeting.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier is expected to return to Berlin in the evening.
Coordinator pays first visit to Poland
Bild: Minister of State Böhmer at the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals
Speech to mark World Wildlife Day
Foreign Minister Steinmeier has two days of crisis diplomacy behind him.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier has two days of crisis diplomacy in Brussels and Switzerland behind him.
After his talks with government officials
She went on to say that the structure of wildlife trafficking had changed:
Following the EU foreign ministers meeting in Brussels, he spoke with Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov and UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon in Geneva about the crisis in Ukraine.
today, the poachers who used to be driven by poverty and hunger were now often part of an organised crime network.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon greet each other in Geneva
Warm welcome:
Dietmar Woidke and Władysław Bartoszewski
“We haven’t got there yet, but I think it is worthwhile to pursue the talks,” said Foreign Minister Steinmeier, speaking at Tegel airport on Tuesday (4 March) after returning to Berlin.
Moreover, Maria Böhmer added, the scale of poaching had increased dramatically:
First stop:
EU Foreign Ministers meeting in Brussels
With Władysław Bartoszewski, the Plenipotentiary of the Prime Minister for International Dialogue, the Coordinator discussed, among other things, how to intensify exchanges between German and Polish school children.
while around a dozen rhinoceroses were poached annually in South Africa five years ago, this figure now exceeded one thousand.
Woidke drew attention to the mismatch between the opportunities to learn German at Polish schools and the opportunities to learn Polish in German schools.
Click hereto read Minister of State Böhmer’s full speech
For the last 15 years, the international community’s focus in the sphere of development cooperation has been on the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
The aim is for them to be realised by 2015.
Bild: Minister of State Böhmer during a panel discussion on World Wildlife Day
The money gained from wildlife trafficking flowed, for example, into arms trafficking and thus helped stir up political unrest.
Improving economic and academic cooperation and transport links
Statement by Foreign Minister Steinmeier in Geneva on 4 March 2014
The situation in Ukraine remains as tense as ever.
The train journey from Berlin to Wrocław still took over five hours, Woidke pointed out.
This was an issue he would take up with the German Government, he announced.
The risk is thus all the greater that somebody might lose their nerve with the result that this political conflict could be followed by renewed bloodshed.
He recalled the special contribution Poland had made to the success of the peaceful revolution in the GDR in 1989.
The EU foreign ministers therefore discussed diplomatic options for achieving de-escalation of the Crimea crisis, their meeting chaired by the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Cathy Ashton.
A meeting of the EU heads of state and government is planned for Thursday (6 March).
It is thus all the more important for us to exhaust all, absolutely all, options to prevent Ukraine from sliding back into violence.
Assessment of the situation is necessary
Germany is doing everything in its power to find a diplomatic solution for calming the situation in Ukraine.
He suggested that the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) could undertake this fact-finding mission.
“A clear message is needed,” emphasised the German Foreign Minister, who also had talks with his French colleague Laurent Fabius on the fringes of the EU's ministers meeting.
Steinmeier said it was now important for Europe – alongside the strong messages it was sending to Russia – to encourage the two governments in Russia and Ukraine to talk directly to one another.
Minister of State Böhmer is at the United Nations in New York from 2 to 5 March to take part in the UN Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals.
Maria Böhmer, Minister of State at the Federal Foreign Office, is at the United Nations in New York from 2 to 5 March to take part in the UN Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals.
Minister of State Böhmer is the German representative in the UN Open Working Group.
The Group is to put forward a proposal to the UN General Assembly on a system of sustainable development goals for the post‑2015 process.
The Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals was established by the UN Conference held in Rio in 2012 with a view to drafting proposals for the UN’s future development agenda by autumn 2014 to follow on from the Millennium Development Goals.
Marking the first UN World Wildlife Day on 3 March, Maria Böhmer stressed that there was an urgent need to step up the fight against poaching and illicit wildlife trafficking.
Talks with Lavrov and Ban in Geneva
We are not close enough to a solution.
And so I cannot at present indicate that we are on course for an international process, for the creation of a contact group, a format in which Russia and Ukraine can talk to and negotiate with each other.
On Tuesday morning (4 March) a meeting took place between Steinmeier and United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.
We discussed the options and are not yet in agreement on the basis for such an international format.
But it is worth our while to keep on talking.
We are under immense time pressure,
Following their exchange, Steinmeier underlined that it was important “to exhaust all, absolutely all, options to prevent Ukraine from sliding back into violence”.
Third stop:
on the one hand due to the developments in Ukraine and the mounting tensions,
On Tuesday (4 March) Foreign Minister Steinmeier also met Swiss President Didier Burkhalter,
who is currently Chair of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE).
“That is why we need an international format which brings Ukrainians and Russians together.
Steinmeier emphasised that it was vital for the crisis diplomacy in Ukraine to make the most of the next one and a half days before the session of the European Council on Thursday (6 March) in Brussels.
“All these discussions are concerned with finding a way, with international assistance, to defuse the tensions within Ukraine and escape from the spiral of escalation.
This is urgently needed, because nerves in Ukraine are almost at breaking point.”
I hope that this morning’s news, that some of the troops amassed on the Russian side of the border have been called back, is true.
An international format for talks on Ukraine could be one step towards overcoming the crisis – for example in the form of a contact group involving Russia and Ukraine.
The two ministers discussed the situation in Ukraine and the possible basis for an international format for talks.
We are pressed for time.
I believe it would be good for the OSCE to play a prominent role in this constellation.”
Russia’s current actions do not yet provide support for such an assurance.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier opening the event “1914 – a Failure of Diplomacy”
Talks in Brussels, Geneva and Berne
A review of the talks with the EU foreign ministers, with Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov and with UN Secretary-General Ban.
It had developed no instititutions for the settlement of disputes.
On 24 February Dietmar Woidke paid his first visit to Warsaw as the German Government’s new Coordinator of German‑Polish Intersocietal and Cross‑Border Cooperation.
Talks with Władysław Bartoszewski
"According to German‑Polish Youth Office figures, every year up to 1800 projects receive funding", Woidke pointed out.
"This has enabled some 70,000 young Germans and Poles to meet and get to know each other."
"Greater interest in learning Polish"
The first thing to do to remedy this, he explained, was to encourage greater interest in learning Polish among pupils in Germany.
"We’ll need to try unconventional approaches here", Woidke noted. In Brandenburg some children could learn Polish from pre‑school right up to when they finish school, he continued.
Young people in vocational training, firefighters and also police officers were now learning Polish.
Brandenburg’s Minister‑President is optimistic that "things are now starting to happen".
Personal encounters and new career prospects were both important motives for learning another language.
Dietmar Woidke talks to Undersecretary of State Henryka Mościcka‑Dendys
In his talks with Henryka Mościcka‑Dendys, Undersecretary of State in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and Jaromir Sokołowski, Undersecretary of State at the Polish President’s Office, the focus was on economic and academic cooperation as well as transport links.
At the presidential chancellery Woidke visited the room with the round table at which from 6 February to 5 April 1989 the decisive talks took place during Poland's transition to democracy.
"We in Germany are highly grateful for the courage the Polish people showed at that time", he commented.
The office of Coordinator was established in 2004 at the initiative of former Brandenburg Minister‑President Matthias Platzeck with a view to strengthening good‑neighbourly ties between Germany and Poland.
In 1914 diplomacy that remained stuck in this mould allowed a political crisis to become a global catastrophe.
Panel discussion at the Federal Foreign Office Venue:
Upcoming events:
10 April:
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier issued the following statement in Geneva on 4 March 2014 after holding talks with Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov and UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon on the situation in Ukraine:
The mood is highly jittery and new rumours are spreading every hour, every day.
That is why I am here in Geneva today and have spoken to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Ban Ki-moon.
I am about to go into talks with the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office, President Didier Burkhalter of Switzerland.
Yesterday I spoke with Russia’s Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov.
We had a difficult, long and serious conversation.
and on the other hand because of the European Council at which the European Heads of Government will meet on Thursday.
We therefore have to make good use of the remaining one and a half days to explore whether an international contact group is a viable option, and if such a group could then help reduce tensions in Ukraine and generally de-escalate the situation.
It would at least be a small sign of a de-escalation, but I have not yet had any official confirmation of it.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier commented on the subject of sanctions against Russia as follows:
I think that if, in the next day and a half, we do not make decisive progress towards reaching international agreement, for example on the formation of a contact group in which Russia is also willing to participate, then I would presume that the debate in the European Council will indeed lead to measures being adopted.
My talks convinced me that the Russian side is aware of the seriousness of the situation.
The assurance that there will be no Russian attack on Ukraine’s territorial integrity I met with the response that any such assurance must also be visible on the ground and documented.
In so far I would say that we are not yet on course for a solution, but in my opinion it is worth using the next day and a half – or it is our responsibility to use the next day and a half – to seek the solution which has so far eluded us.
Is Today’s Europe Proof Against the Mistakes of 1914?
German Historical Museum, Schlüterhof
Summing-Up and Conclusions for Diplomacy in the 21st Century  Venue:
All events in this series will be opened – engagements permitting – by Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier.
The series is being planned with advice from Prof. Herfried Münkler from Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin.
A document will be published subsequently with the results of the discussions.
Additional event:
Europe 1914 – Europe 2014 Venue:
He then flew to Berne to meet Didier Burkhalter, Chair of the OSCE.
His diplomatic endeavours had taken him to Brussels, Geneva and Berne.
Speaking at the start of the EU foreign ministers meeting in Brussels on Monday (3 March), Foreign Minister Steinmeier stated, “Without a doubt Europe is facing its severest crisis since the fall of the Wall.
The role of the OSCE in Berne
The talks in Berne focused on a possible OSCE observer mission in Ukraine.
Speaking in Berne, Foreign Minister Steinmeier said that the risk of new bloodshed arising from the political conflict was, “simply, a reality”.
German Historical Museum, Schlüterhof Frank-Walter Steinmeier in discussion with young European historians taking part in the History Campus of the Federal Agency for Civic Education
Human Rights Commissioner Strässer:
Violence against women is not acceptable!
Following the publication of a study by the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights on violence against women, the Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid, Christoph Strässer, issued the following statement today (5 March):
1914/2014 – Of the Failure of and the Need for Diplomacy
The collapse in summer 1914 of the fragile balance of power in Europe is a woeful tale of failure on the part of the elites, the military and also diplomacy.
German Historical Museum, Schlüterhof With Christopher Clark and Gerd Krumeich Moderator: N.N:
Europasaal, Federal Foreign Office With Pascale Hugues, Herfried Münkler, Michael Thumann, Andreas Wirsching Moderator: Peter Lange
How does the July 1914 Crisis Compare with Current Security Issues in East Asia? Venue:
German Historical Museum, Schlüterhof With Kevin Rudd Moderator: N.N:
Those inside or outside Lebanon who are bent on destabilising the country must not be allowed to succeed.
Spring (date to be confirmed):
Palais Beauharnais, German Embassy Paris With Frank-Walter Steinmeier, Laurent Fabius, Nicolas Beaupré (to be confirmed), Arndt Weinrich Moderator: N.N.
June (date to be confirmed):
With Włodzimierz Borodziej and Igor Narskij (both to be confirmed) Moderator: N.N.
November (date to be confirmed):
Federal Foreign Office With Herfried Münkler Moderator: N.N:
The Federal Foreign Office is organising a series of public lectures and discussions to commemorate the outbreak of World War I.
In the complex and interconnected Europe of the early 20th century mindsets moulded by the Congress of Vienna had long become obsolete.
Past events:
Declining Empires as a Security Risk
Lebanon can count on the support of the international community and Germany in its efforts to promote intercommunal understanding and deal with the consequences of the war in Syria.
That is the clear message we will be sending at today’s Lebanon conference here in Paris.
Text crisis diplomacy film:
crisis diplomacy continues
The intensive search for diplomatic solutions to the conflict in Ukraine continues.
To this end, Foreign Minister Steinmeier held in‑depth talks in Brussels and in Switzerland on 3 and 4 March 2014.
He has two days of crisis diplomacy behind him.
As Foreign Minister Steinmeier returns to Berlin on Tuesday afternoon, he is able to tell the waiting journalists about his talks on the crisis in Ukraine, and even to report a small amount of progress in the dialogue...
Things start in Brussels on Monday,
Ukrainian flags fly in the European Quarter – a demonstration in favour of the unity of Ukraine.
Opposite, in the EU Council building, the EU Foreign Ministers are coming together for a hastily scheduled meeting.
Europe was facing its severest crisis since the fall of the Wall,
Foreign Minister Steinmeier clearly reiterated after arriving.
Following this, with his European colleagues he strives to work out diplomatic solutions for Ukraine.
For example, an international contact group could be set up...
After the meeting Steinmeier speaks to the press about the various ideas and options.
He also advocates sending an observer mission to the Crimean peninsula – and he remains cautiously optimistic.
I presume that a change of course is still possible and, together with the European colleagues we have been sitting with today, we will of course do everything possible to make this happen.
As he departs, Steinmeier is bid a warm farewell by the French Foreign Minister Laurent Fabius, he must then travel quickly on to Geneva.
Here, a dinner with Russia’s Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov has been arranged at the last minute.
An in‑depth and serious discussion – in the end in private.
Lavrov must travel on in the evening... and crisis diplomacy is still far from reaching its goal.
After a short night comes
a working breakfast between Foreign Minister Steinmeier and UN Secretary‑General Ban Ki‑moon, also in Geneva.
Here the topic is once again how the situation in Ukraine could be de‑escalated, using diplomatic means.
Time for this is running short:
O‑TON FM “We are under immense time pressure, on the one hand due to the developments in Ukraine and the increasing tensions and on the other hand because of the European Council meeting of European heads of government this week.”
If by then no positive signals had come from Moscow, he continued, then the EU could adopt measures against Russia.
An onward flight to Bern, where talks will address the role of the OSCE in resolving the conflict in Ukraine.
The Organization for Security and Co‑operation in Europe – OSCE – is currently chaired by Switzerland.
In the Government’s guest house Foreign Minister Steinmeier is received by President Didier Burkhalter.
Steinmeier emphasises how positive it would be if the OSCE could play a prominent role – in an international format which brings the Ukrainians and Russians together.
That evening the OSCE, at the invitation of Ukraine, decides to send an international team of inspectors to the crisis region.
From Switzerland the journey finally returns to Berlin.
Time to discuss the talks of recent hours with the journalists accompanying the trip.
In the meantime, news has arrived from Russia that President Putin could agree to forming an international contact group.
Journalists from Berlin are already waiting at Tegel airport.
For Foreign Minister Steinmeier this is practically just a pit‑stop, as early on Wednesday he is travelling to Paris for more discussions... the crisis diplomacy continues.
The European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights (FRA) was founded in 2007 and supports the European Union and its member states in protecting and enforcing human rights.
So far 187 states have ratified the Convention, including Germany in 1985.
The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women examines to what extent the states parties are fulfilling their obligations from the Convention.
On 5 March 2014 the Agency published a report on violence against women, which is based on the results of an EU-wide survey.
We should see the forthcoming International Women’s Day on 8 March as an opportunity to shine a spotlight on this important task.
The report shows that violence against women is widespread in Europe and provides information on the forms of physical, sexual and psychological violence that women experience during their childhood and as adults.
Woidke honoured Poland’s special role in the 20th century by visiting the historic apartments in the presidential chancellery where the famous round table‑talks took place in 1989 and laying a wreath on the grave of the Unknown Soldier.
Statement by Foreign Minister Steinmeier on the Lebanon conference in Paris
Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement today in Paris before the start of an international conference on Lebanon:
With the formation of a government of national unity, Lebanon is taking a firm stand against being drawn into the Syrian civil war.
We welcome the commitment shown by all religious and other groupings in Lebanon to the principles of pluralism and peaceful co‑existence.
That is why it is so important to help Lebanon strengthen national cohesion.
Only a politically united and stable country can successfully tackle the challenges ahead.
Notably the influx of over a million Syrian refugees puts a severe strain on the country, a strain it has so far stood up to.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier will be attending the meeting convened today in Paris by the International Support Group for Lebanon.
The International Support Group was established on 25 September 2013 on the margins of the UN General Assembly in New York with the aim of stabilising Lebanon and helping it deal with the consequences of the ongoing crisis in Syria. Under the aegis of the United Nations
membership includes, along with Lebanon, the five permanent members of the UN Security Council as well as international organisations, such as the Arab League, the European Union and the World Bank.
Germany also takes part in the consultations of the International Support Group by virtue of the substantial humanitarian aid and assistance for refugees we provide in Lebanon as well as our efforts to strengthen state institutions there.
Since 2012 the German Government has provided some 100 million euros in humanitarian aid for Syrian refugees in Lebanon.
In a unique programme unmatched anywhere else in the EU, Germany is currently in the process of taking in 10,000 Syrian refugees, mostly from refugee camps in Lebanon.
Since the start of the crisis in Syria 30,000 Syrians have found shelter in Germany.
Year of commemoration
The Federal Government’s website provides information about the year of commemoration 2014.
I am appalled by the study’s finding that violence against women remains commonplace in our society.
Unfortunately it is not a marginal issue, but affects one in three women in the EU.
We should tolerate neither physical nor psychological violence against women!
The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) addresses the issue of putting an end to violence against women.
Germany, too, submits to review at regular intervals.
Small arms and light weapons
German security interests are affected in many ways.
The control of small arms and light weapons, including their ammunition, as a key element in crisis prevention and post-conflict peace-building is one of the German Government’s central concerns in the field of conventional arms control.
Security is crucial for development.
The proliferation of illegal small arms hinders economic and social development and plays a major role in the violent escalation of conflicts, especially in urban areas.
It impedes investment and eats up resources for private security measures – not to mention the immediate consequences for those affected.
The control of small arms is therefore a flanking measure for German development cooperation.
In many parts of the world, small arms can be acquired by civilians relatively easily and cheaply, either legally or, more usually, illegally.
In many crisis regions, they are widespread beyond the confines of the regular armed forces and security forces.
It is estimated that over 875 million small arms, with an average service life of 30-50 years, are in circulation worldwide.
Many small arms can be used without difficulty even by children.
In the internal and cross-border conflicts of the last decades, the large majority of casualties, especially among the civilian population, were caused by small arms.
In particular, shoulder-fired anti-aircraft systems or “man-portable air-defence systems” (“MANPADS”), which are regarded as light weapons, represent a serious threat to both civilian and military aircraft if they fall into the hands of terrorists.
United Nations
Germany takes an active part in the UN Small Arms Process, which constitutes the global reference framework for efforts in the field of small arms control.
The UN Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects adopted the UN Programme of Action on Small Arms and Light Weapons in July 2001.
The aim is to help states implement the Programme of Action and to find the broadest possible consensus on the most important elements.
All important documents on this, including the country reports on national implementation, are available on the internet platform created for the UN Office for Disarmament Affairs with German support:
Meeting of States as part of the UN Small Arms Process
The status of implementation of the UN Programme of Action on Small Arms is discussed every two years at the Meeting of States and more comprehensive stock is taken of the situation at a Review Conference every six years.
The Fourth Biennial Meeting of States in New York from 14 to 18 June 2010 succeeded for the first time in adopting a final outcome document by consensus.
It contains numerous recommendations on how to improve implementation in the key areas discussed: border control, international cooperation, marking and tracing and the institutional framework.
The German Government played an active part, pressing in particular for improved international cooperation on implementation.
Furthermore, the Conference agreed on a follow-up process for the next six-year cycle until the Third Review Conference in 2018.
ISACS
a clear message of support
The group was established on the margins of UN Week with the aim of helping to stabilise Lebanon.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier with his French and American counterparts, Fabius and Kerry, President of France Hollande and British Foreign Minister Hague (from left to right)
The group was established in 2013 on the margins of the UN General Assembly in New York.
At the start, the German Foreign Minister made it clear that Lebanon could count on the support of the international community and Germany in its efforts to promote intercommunal understanding and deal with the consequences of the war in Syria.
Germany is also taking part in the meeting.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier stressed that with the formation of a government of national unity, Lebanon was “taking a firm stand against being drawn into the Syrian civil war”.
He welcomed this all the more as it was a sign of the commitment shown by “all religious and other groupings in the country to the principles of pluralism and peaceful co-existence”.
Steinmeier went on to say that this was the “clear message” that the International Support Group wanted to send at today’s Lebanon conference in Paris.
Helping to stabilise Lebanon
The International Support Group for Lebanon was established on 25 September 2013 on the margins of the UN General Assembly in New York with the aim of stabilising the country and helping it deal with the consequences of the ongoing crisis in Syria.
Under the aegis of the United Nations membership includes, along with Lebanon, the five permanent members of the UN Security Council as well as international organisations, such as the Arab League, the European Union and the World Bank.
Germany also takes part in the consultations of the International Support Group by virtue of the substantial humanitarian aid and assistance for refugees it provides in Lebanon as well as its efforts to strengthen state institutions there.
But Libya is still a very fragile state which is confronted by tremendous challenges.
Germany and France have thus decided to tackle this problem by means of a joint project.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier is attending the meeting convened in Paris by the International Support Group for Lebanon.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier is attending the meeting convened today in Paris by the International Support Group for Lebanon.
At the invitation of France, the members of the International Support Group for Lebanon are meeting once again today, under the aegis of the United Nations.
Together, President François Hollande and President of Lebanon Michel Sleiman will open the consultations, which will focus primarily on how to assist Lebanon on the path to stabilising the country and in dealing with the consequences of the Syria crisis.
That is why it is so important to help Lebanon strengthen national cohesion.
The first flight chartered by the Federal Government with Syrian refugees, 11 September
Since 2012 the German Government has provided some 100 million euros in humanitarian aid for Syrian refugees in Lebanon.
Marking and tracing
In June 2005, a politically binding UN instrument on the marking and tracing of small arms was adopted with active German support.
In this instrument, UN member states undertake to mark the weapons they have produced or imported in line with uniform international rules, to compile arms registers and to work together on tracing illegal arms supplies.
Joint project to securely store stockpiles of arms in Libya
In addition to implementation of the instrument at national level, a particular priority is to encourage its international implementation.
The status of implementation and recommendations for improving it are discussed at the Biennial Meetings of States on Small Arms and, for the first time, at a Meeting of Governmental Experts in May 2011.
Inventory management
One of the main concerns of the UN Programme of Action on Small Arms is how to manage and secure official stocks of small arms and light weapons.
Since 2007, the German Government has placed increasing emphasis on inventory management, a subject which lends itself particularly well as a starting-point for a substantive bilateral security dialogue.
The recommendations of an international meeting of experts on issues of management and securitisation, but also on the reduction and destruction of stocks of conventional weapons and ammunition, held during Germany’s Presidency of the European Council, form the basis for technical cooperation activities.
Conventional ammunition
Since the negotiations on the UN instrument on marking and tracing, Germany has sought an appropriate approach to the problem of ammunition.
Since 2005 Germany has, together with France, sponsored resolutions on how to handle ammunition stocks in the First Committee of the UN General Assembly.
On this basis, a UN Group of Experts drew up recommendations for dealing with excess stocks of conventional ammunition which were endorsed in 2008 and recommended to the UN member states for implementation.
This resolution also called for the elaboration of technical guidelines for the implementation of these recommendations.
The IATGs (International Ammunition Technical Guidelines) have since been completed by a group of experts in which Germany participated.
They give states a comprehensive guide, which they can use on a voluntary basis, on how to deal with ammunition and explosives.
Group of Interested States
In addition, Germany is continuing its involvement in the Group of Interested States (GIS), which meets in New York.
This Group was created in 1998 following a German initiative.
It provides a forum in which all relevant parties with an interest in the UN small arms control process can exchange views on project work and political measures to underpin the implementation of the UN Programme of Action on Small Arms.
The importance of the GIS’s practical work has been highlighted since then in the First Committee of the UN General Assembly by a resolution sponsored on a regular basis by Germany and adopted by consensus (most recently UN Resolution A/Res/67/50 of 4 January 2013).
Due to their commitment in the small arms sphere, in particular small arms project work, the European Union and its Member States are among the key global players in this field.
In December 2005, the European Council adopted the European Union Strategy to combat the illicit accumulation and trafficking of small arms and light weapons and their ammunition.
The EU’s Small Arms Strategy aims to exploit all the political and financial instruments at the EU’s disposal, so as to facilitate a coordinated, coherent EU policy on small arms.
The three main pillars of the Strategy are effective multilateralism, the prevention of illegal arms supplies and project cooperation with the affected states/regions.
In keeping with a decision by the European Council in December 2008, all new third-state agreements will include elements relating to cooperation on the implementation of the Small Arms Strategy (the “small arms clause”).
In regional terms, the focus has been on Ukraine, the Western Balkans and Africa.
The Libyan people have shown immense courage in their fight for freedom.
This material, most of which is not under state control, presents a risk for the stability of the entire region.
Germany will make available a total of several million euros in the course of the year for projects designed to securely store arms and munitions in Libya.
Click here for an up-to-date overview of the bilateral German projects: www.diplo.de
In Central America, the UN Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America and the Caribbean (UNLIREC) holds seminars on arms control for decision-makers in the police force, judicial system and the world of politics.
Sub-Saharan Africa is a particular focus of the project work.
For example, since 2003 Germany has been providing 800,000 euros annually for a project operated by the British NGO HALO Trust to collect and destroy the remnants of war in Afghanistan.
Germany has entered into a range of bilateral commitments in the field of small arms.
Bilateral engagement
The implementation of the OSCE Document on Small Arms and Light Weapons is always discussed at review conferences, most recently in Vienna in May 2012.
In addition to projects in the field of Disarmament, Demobilization & Reintegration (DDR), other priorities include training programmes to improve the management and securitisation of official stocks.
Germany takes part in assessment visits, training activities and other project work, including in Serbia, Montenegro, Kosovo and Albania.
The OSCE adopted a Document on Small Arms and Light Weapons as early as November 2000.
The Document sets out common criteria relating to exports and excess stocks, creates regional transparency for small arms transfers and establishes the basis for a comprehensive exchange of information.
This is the most far-reaching politically binding document on military small arms at regional level and has a pilot function for the implementation and further development of the UN Programme of Action on Small Arms.
The OSCE set out practical aids for implementation in its Best Practice Guides of 2003.
It was with the same goal that the OSCE adopted a document on stocks of conventional ammunition in December 2003.
A Handbook of Best Practices on ammunition was published in 2008 with active German involvement.
Projects being carried out during the current implementation phase include a dialogue among civil societies in Africa, China and the EU on the importance of controlling conventional weapons transfers organised by the NGO Saferworld, the establishment of a database to identify suspicious air transports, the funding of capacity-building measures in the judicial, police and political spheres in Central America, as well as the improvement of the storage of small arms and ammunition in Libya.
The German Government regards small arms control as an active contribution towards crisis prevention.
Small arms and light weapons (SALW), referred to in this text as small arms are weapons and weapons systems which are manufactured to military specifications for use as weapons of war or which are converted into such weapons and are normally reserved for military use.
Franco-German engagement to promote stability and security in Libya and the region:
Germany and France are to work closely together to secure arms stockpiles in Libya.
At the International Donor Conference for Libya in Rome today Foreign Minister Steinmeier and his French counterpart Laurent Fabius announced the launch of a joint Franco-German project.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement today at the start of the Libya Conference in Rome:
One of the most difficult tasks the country faces is dealing with the lethal legacy of the Gaddafi regime – the arms and munitions stockpiles it left behind.
Libya can only achieve long-term stability and security if it establishes stable and widely accepted state structures.
We call on all political forces to play a constructive role in the constitution-writing process and to enable free and fair parliamentary elections to be held this year.
Franco-German engagement for Libya
Germany hands over police housing
Under the aegis of the United Nations and the host, Italy, they discussed with the Libyan Government how the international community can help foster stability in the North African country and in the region.
At the International Donor Conference for Libya in Rome, Foreign Minister Steinmeier and his French counterpart Laurent Fabius announced the launch of a joint Franco-German project designed to securely store arms and munitions in Libya.
During the conference, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier and his French opposite number Laurent Fabius announced the launch of a joint Franco-German project designed to securely store arms in Libya.
Bild: Some 40 countries and international organisations attended the International Donor Conference for Libya in Rome.
With the end of the Gaddafi regime in 2011, Libya had to make a fresh start.
Housing and training facilities have now been handed over to the Afghan Border Police.
The international community is helping the country to tackle the many challenges it faces, such as the development of functioning state structures and border management.
Their construction was funded by the Federal Foreign Office.
Handover ceremony:
A high-level International Donor Conference for Libya was held in Rome on 6 March.
At the invitation of Italy’s Foreign Minister Federica Mogherini, some 40 Foreign Ministers and representatives of international organisations came together.
On the Libyan side, both Prime Minister Ali Zidan and Foreign Minister Mohamed Abdelaziz took part.
Helping to secure arms stockpiles
Foreign Minister Steinmeier travelled to Rome in the morning with his French counterpart Laurent Fabius.
However, the country was still fragile and confronted with “tremendous challenges”.
Foreign Minister Fabius called the security situation “very worrying”.
Bild: The French and German Foreign Ministers present a joint project to promote Libya’s security.
The key problem continues to be how to deal with the legacy of the Gaddafi regime – the arms and munitions stockpiles it left behind.
Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Fabius thus announced the launch of a joint Franco-German project.
The two countries are to work closely together to secure arms stockpiles in Libya.
The aim of the Franco-German project announced in Rome is to help secure arms stockpiles.
He went on to say that Germany would make available a total of several million euros in the course of the year for projects designed to securely store arms and munitions in Libya.
Establishment of stable state structures
Another central theme of the conference was the establishment of stable state structures in Libya.
The French Foreign Minister urged the Libyan representatives to talk to one another and to seek solutions.
He saw the large number of participants in the conference as “encouraging”.
Bild: On the margins of the conference: Foreign Minister Steinmeier and Secretary Kerry
International Women’s Day:
The consultations on the crisis in Ukraine continued on the margins of the ministerial conference on Libya:
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and his US counterpart John Kerry met for talks in private.
Demonstrating against violence against women
Today, over 100 years later, some of their demands have largely been met, but in other areas there is still room for improvement.
However, he went on to say, it would be irresponsible to abandon the international efforts to bring about a de-escalation.
German-Portuguese Forum at the Federal Foreign Office
The situation in Ukraine should spur Foreign Ministers and Heads of Government on to undertake even greater efforts.
Violence against women has many different faces
More on Germany’s support for Libya
Women police officers have their own housing block with an inner courtyard.
Some 40 countries and international organisations came together in Rome to pledge further support for Libya.
A report published on 5 March by the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights (FRA) shows that a third of all women in EU member states have suffered physical and/or sexual violence.
Against the backdrop of the two countries’ close cooperation, particularly with regard to overcoming the economic and financial crisis, the Forum offers a two-day platform (10 and 11 March) for more detailed exchange.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier reiterated his call to “all political forces to play a constructive role in the constitution-writing process and to enable free and fair parliamentary elections to be held this year”.
It proved, he said, that even in our society violence against women was not a problem restricted to marginalised sections of society.
Steinmeier stressed that it had not been possible to achieve a breakthrough to date.
This shocking discovery is a wake-up call to policymakers and society to significantly step up their efforts to better protect women and girls.
Core objective:
Speakers will include judges Peter Huber and Joaquim José Coelho de Sousa Ribeiro from the constitutional courts as well as State Secretaries Steffen Kampeter (Federal Ministry of Finance), Jörg Asmussen (Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs) and Bruno Maçães (European Affairs).
The Federal Foreign Office funds numerous projects around the world aimed at combating violence against women and improving equality.
In 2013, for example, it supported a local NGO in Ukraine which works to combat trafficking in women and forced prostitution.
The NGO trained police officers and staff in state administration, set up phone hotlines and carried out poster campaigns in public areas, airports and railway stations.
Plaque commemorating the handover
Trauma therapy for schoolgirls in Libya: Project supported by the Federal Foreign Office
Bringing together some 200 participants, the Forum is set to provide fresh impetus for joint action and enhance mutual understanding.
The German-Portuguese Forum and the Ministers’ opening addresses will be open to the press.
Germany also runs a nationwide literacy programme for Afghan police officers and helps fund police salaries.
In 2012 funding was given to an education campaign against female genital mutilation in Djibouti.
Handover to be completed by the end of 2014
In cooperation with the United Nations (UN) the Federal Foreign Office supports
training modules for police officers taking part in UN peace missions aimed at preventing and combating sexual violence.
Policy on women and gender equality in the United Nations
Information on women and gender equality from the United Nations website
Germany will hand over all police training facilities developed by the GPPT to the Afghan authorities by the end of 2014.
This will mark the termination of the bilateral police project in its present form.
German support for civil aviation development
The crisis in Crimea is threatening to divide Europe.
Diplomatic efforts to resolve the crisis in Crimea continue.
Since the beginning of the week, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier has been travelling non-stop to help resolve the conflict.
Welcome in Geneva –
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
At the beginning of the week the German Foreign Minister first of all held important discussions with his EU counterparts in Brussels.
Following this, Steinmeier consulted with the Swiss Chair of the OSCE, Didier Burkhalter, in Berne.
During their talks they discussed sending an OSCE observer mission to Crimea.
Click here for more information on the Foreign Minister’s trip to Brussels, Geneva and Berne
Foreign Minister Steinmeier after the consultations on Ukraine in Paris
The construction of housing for the Afghan Border Police is part and parcel of the intensive support Germany is providing for the development of civil aviation in Afghanistan.
However, it had not been possible to achieve the goal of creating an international contact group.
I am not satisfied with the overall result.
Nonetheless I am at least pleased that the parties involved who we have spoken to today do not want to further escalate the situation.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier talking to his American colleague Kerry
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and his French counterpart Laurent Fabius had arrived from Paris together for the occasion.
Intensive discussions on the crisis in Crimea also took place on the margins of this conference.
In Rome, Foreign Minister Steinmeier met, amongst others, his US opposite number, John Kerry, for private talks.
“We need each other – that includes Russia – in order to resolve other conflicts, such as those in Iran or Syria.”
As “a division arising from the conflict in Ukraine could lead to (...) international cooperation being broken off for quite some time”.
According to the Foreign Minister, this must not be allowed to happen.
Click here to read the Foreign Minister’s full statement.
Whilst the Foreign Ministers were meeting in Rome, the European Heads of State and Government met in Brussels for a special summit on Ukraine.
Federal Chancellor Angela Merkel held talks there with her European counterparts as well as the new Ukrainian Prime Minister, Arseniy Yatsenyuk, in which they discussed issues such as agreeing on measures against Russia.
For more information on the EU special summit click here.
EU special summit on Ukraine
This engagement fosters stability, especially in post-conflict areas.
For instance, Germany became engaged in Libya soon after the armed conflict.
Back in 2011, the German Government provided 750,000 euros for the development of the Libyan Center for Mine Action and Remnants of War in Libya; from 2012 to 2017, GIZ is funding a long-term programme to develop capacities (volume: total of around 8 million of which 5 million are being provided via the EU).
At the start of the conference, Steinmeier stressed that “the Libyan people have shown immense courage in their fight for freedom”.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier emphasised that this was also important because “this material, most of which is not under state control, presents a risk for the stability of the entire region”.
In Côte d’Ivoire, GIZ has been charged by the Federal Foreign Office with carrying out an overarching small arms control project, within the framework of which the small arms commission is being bolstered and a programme to collect weapons is being devised.
Small arms* are responsible for more casualties than any other type of weapon; they aggravate conflicts, destabilise societies and hinder development.
During the last few years, project cooperation has focused on improving the management and securitisation of stocks of small arms and conventional ammunition, on destroying surplus stocks, and on measures for the registration and marking of small arms.
They can continue to endanger public security long after a conflict has ended, cause conflicts to flare up again, destabilise societies and states and hold back economic development.
A supplementary annex on securitising stocks of shoulder-fired anti-aircraft systems (MANPADS) was completed in 2006.
It contains statements and recommendations on various aspects of small arms control (laws, production, marking and registration, cooperation on tracing, storage, destruction of surplus arms, awareness-raising among the population, disarmament, demobilisation and reintegration, as well as international trade) and has been the launch-pad for a host of global and regional initiatives.
The combination of standardisation, exchange of experience and project work is unique in the OSCE.
Germany is supporting this project by financing a software instrument which renders the ISACS practicable and means it can be used to assess the state of any given country’s small arms control by way of benchmarks and indicators.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier is working to continue the diplomatic efforts to reach a solution in Ukraine.
Even though there has not yet been a breakthrough, in Rome on Thursday (6 March), the German Foreign Minister said that it would be irresponsible to give up on the efforts to de-escalate the situation.
He met Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov and UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon on Tuesday (4 March) in Geneva.
Steps to de-escalate the situation to be taken
The situation in Ukraine was the topic of discussions held on the margins of the international conference on Lebanon in Paris on Wednesday (5 March).
After more than 12 hour-long consultations with his European partners and US Secretary of State John Kerry, as well as the Foreign Ministers from Russia and Ukraine, Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued a statement in Paris on Wednesday evening, saying that all those involved had agreed to take “steps to de-escalate the situation”.
On Thursday (6 March), the consultations on Ukraine continued on the margins of the conference on Libya in Rome.
In total, around 40 Foreign Ministers and representatives of international organisations took part in the conference.
After talks with his counterparts from the United States, France, Great Britain and Italy, Foreign Minister Steinmeier reiterated his warning that Europe could be divided.
That the situation in Ukraine had escalated further in the last 24 hours had to incite the Foreign Ministers and Heads of Government to undertake even greater efforts, continued Steinmeier.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier in Rome on 6 March on the situation in Ukraine
Mazar-e-Sharif airport:
Germany is supporting long‑term police capacity‑building in Afghanistan.
Housing at Mazar‑e‑Sharif airport handed over to the Afghan Border Police
German Ambassador Martin Jäger and Deputy Interior Minister Yarwar (centre)
At the handover ceremony German Ambassador Martin Jäger and Federal Police Headquarters President Dieter Romann officially transferred the Afghan Border Police housing block at Mazar‑e‑Sharif airport to Afghan ownership.
The Afghan guests of honour included Deputy Interior Minister Yarwar, General Groogh, Deputy Head of the Afghan Border Police in the Interior Ministry, and Balkh Deputy Governor Wahdat.
Housing and training facilities for 200 police officers
The facilities include a housing block for 200 persons, a training block with classrooms and other premises, a kitchen block and a sanitation block.
The construction work was carried out by the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) at an estimated cost of 2.6 million euros, funded from the Federal Foreign Office budget.
It is one of the components of our bilateral police project (German Police Project Team, GPPT).
long‑term capacity‑building
The GPPT’s core objective is long‑term police capacity‑building in Afghanistan.
For this purpose Germany is providing 77 million euros a year over the period 2010‑2014 and has up to 200 German police officers serving in Afghanistan.
The main focus of the mission is training, mentoring and infrastructure.
In addition the GPPT advises Afghan Border Police units based at Kabul and Mazar‑e‑Sharif airports.
In the post‑2014 period Germany will continue to advise on and finance police capacity‑building in Afghanistan.
We have helped finance the construction of the new airport at Mazar‑e‑Sharif (48 million euros, co‑funded by the United Arab Emirates).
The new civil aviation terminal was handed over to the Afghan authorities in June 2013.
Direct flights from Istanbul to Mazar‑e‑Sharif started in November 2013. This is the first service to a regional airport in Afghanistan operated by a major international airline.
Combating violence, promoting equality
Women across the world have been marking International Women’s Day for more than 100 years.
But even today violence against women and inequality are still commonplace in many societies – including the European Union.
On 8 March 1911, women in Germany, Denmark, Austria and Switzerland took to the streets for the first time to demand women’s suffrage and better working conditions.
A report published by the EU Agency for Fundamental Rights on 5 March shows how commonplace violence against women is, even in Europe.
Female life expectancy and girls’ access to education have also improved greatly over the past few years; today more women than ever have an income of their own.
Violence against women not a marginal issue
Women’s suffrage, 100 years ago still a revolutionary idea, is now a reality in most countries around the world.
At the same time, however, women’s rights continue to be violated all around the world.
Violence against women is still commonplace in many societies – including the European Union.
Christoph Strässer, the Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy, was shocked at the study’s findings.
The Human Rights Commissioner’s full statement can be found here.
Ukraine, Chechnya, Djibouti: Strengthening women’s rights worldwide
Another project supported by the Federal Foreign Office last year aimed to reduce domestic violence in Chechnya and strengthen women’s organisations.
The UN also works to strengthen women’s rights through its agency UN Women and the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW).
The Second Review Conference of the Programme of Action on Small Arms in August and September 2012 was successfully concluded with a political declaration reaffirming the goals of small arms control and with outcome documents on the implementation of the Small Arms Programme of Action and the International Tracing Instrument (ITI).
In support of the Programme, the German Government has joined an initiative launched up by Australia to back a new facility to fund projects to implement the Programme of Action on Small Arms and a future ATT. To this end, it pledged to make 500,000 euros available for projects by the end of 2013.
In four years of work involving up to 300 experts around the world, the United Nations has created the International Small Arms Control Standards (ISACS), a comprehensive set of recommendations on dealing with small weapons and ammunition which spells out the guidelines of the Programme of Action on Small Arms, the International Tracing Instrument and the Firearms Protocol and translates them into concrete instructions.
Many OSCE states make use of the possibility, provided for in the Documents on small arms and conventional ammunition, of asking other participating states for help in securitising and destroying excess stockpiles of small arms and ammunition.
Two partners for Europe:
On Monday, 10 March, Foreign Minister Steinmeier will be joined by his Portuguese counterpart Rui Machete in opening the second German-Portuguese Forum in Berlin.
To this end, participants will among other things compare the roles of their respective constitutional courts and discuss the German-Portuguese outlook on the European Union’s future.
Interpretation of the entire conference will be available in German and Portuguese.
Promoting Europe together
Close neighbourly relations and European cooperation were the topics discussed during the visit by the Czech Foreign Minister.
The Ukraine crisis was a special focus.
Foreign Minister Zaorálek in Berlin for his first official visit
The current crisis in Ukraine was a special focus of the talks between the two Foreign Ministers.
Referring to the year of commemoration 2014, the German Foreign Minister expressed his thanks and said:
Turning to the excellent quality of bilateral relations, Foreign Minister Steinmeier spoke of “good fortune in the light of our difficult history”.
Bild: Steinmeier and Zaorálek at the joint press conference
Ukraine: respect for territorial integrity
The President of the German War Graves Commission, Markus Meckel, will also give an address at the opening ceremony.
The two Foreign Ministers gave special attention to the situation in Ukraine and the Crimea crisis during their talks.
It highlights aspects such as cooperation with partner countries and includes a presentation on existing German war graves. One of the items on display is a memorial stone for a Jewish German soldier in the First World War.
Woidke praises German-Polish school project
Numerous German missions abroad have provided pictures and texts for the exhibition.
The German Foreign Minister stressed that Russia had “added fuel to the fire” with its decision on the Crimea referendum and the draft bill on the accession of new Federation members.
which details a host of events, memorial projects and exhibitions commemorating the First World War in Germany and internationally.
The exhibition will be on view in the Atrium of the Federal Foreign Office until 25 April 2014.
Woidke praises the project in Zehdenick
Minister of State Böhmer represents the Federal Government at the inauguration of the President of Chile, Bachelet.
Minister of State Böhmer will meet the president-elect on Wednesday for a bilateral discussion which will focus on the state of German-Chilean relations.
Cooperation in the field of education constitutes a particular priority of the trip.
Chile’s president-elect has announced that she will focus on reforms in the education sector during her second term in office.
Minister of State Böhmer wants to offer to further intensify cooperation, above all within the field of the “dual system of vocational training”.
Referring to the current year of commemoration, he thanked the Czech Republic for its help in providing “crucial impetus” on the road to German unity.
The Minister of State at the Federal Foreign Office, Maria Böhmer, is flying to Chile for a three-day visit on Sunday 9 March.
On the request of the Federal Chancellor, the Minister of State is taking part in the inauguration ceremony for Chile’s new President, Michelle Bachelet, as Germany’s official representative on Tuesday, 11 March.
She will also use the occasion to extend an invitation on behalf of the Federal Chancellor to Ms Bachelet to make an official visit to Germany in October.
Frank-Walter Steinmeier warned against further escalation in the Crimea and called for Ukraine’s territorial integrity to be respected.
25 years ago, many refugees from the former GDR found shelter in Palais Lobkowicz, the German Embassy in Prague.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier recalled this very special event on the occasion of the visit by his Czech opposite number, Lubomír Zaorálek.
In Zehdenick Woidke also had a meeting with Oberhavel District Commissioner Karl-Heinz Schröter.
Steinmeier emphasised that many had contributed to this,
Referring to the challenges facing the European Union, above all overcoming the sovereign debt crisis, the German Foreign Minister thanked his Czech counterpart for the close cooperation based on mutual trust on European issues.
At the subsequent press conference, they expressed their concern that the situation might escalate further.
Czech Foreign Minister Zaorálek stressed that this crisis was of great importance to his country in the light of its considerable cultural and economic ties with Ukraine.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier focused in particular on the early referendum in the Crimea and urged that Ukraine’s territorial integrity be respected.
Oberstufenzentrum Director Dieter Starke and pupil representatives presented the Minister-President with their findings on “The Start-Up Process in Poland and Germany”.
I am quite certain that not only would the European Union vehemently condemn the annexation but that the international community, including Russia’s neighbours, would react with indignation.
In this connection the Coordinator of German-Polish Cooperation commented as follows:
They enable young people to meet and interact and so gain a better understanding of other cultures.
Woidke with German and Polish pupils
Between turmoil and a fresh start
The Arab world is in upheaval.
Alongside the protests and the violence, there is also hope for a new beginning.
We want to help build bridges and so break down prejudice.”
Zehdenick is currently hosting a group of twelve pupils from its Polish partner district of Siedlce.
Last September a group of Zehdenick pupils visited Warsaw to see for themselves what school was like in Poland.
More on the work of the Coordinator of German-Polish Cooperation
Coordinator of German-Polish Cooperation Dietmar Woidke has visited a bilateral project in Zehdenick involving pupils from Brandenburg and Siedlce and described it as an exemplary initiative.
These kinds of projects and encounters can foster and further strengthen the good relations our two countries enjoy.
Minister of State Roth opens “Remembering for the Future” exhibition at the Federal Foreign Office
“Remembering for the Future” – This is the motto of an exhibition organised jointly by the Federal Foreign Office and the German War Graves Commission to be opened in the Atrium of the Federal Foreign Office in Berlin on Monday, 10 March, by Minister of State Michael Roth.
The exhibition covers a wide spectrum, from the First World War and the establishment of the War Graves Commission to caring for war graves worldwide as a task for the state and the future-oriented international youth work carried out by the War Graves Commission.
As well as being the last service to the dead as a humanitarian duty to their families, the work of the War Graves Commission is also an element of German foreign policy, in the sense of “reconciliation over the graves”.
The Federal Foreign Office and its missions abroad support this work, for example by looking after war graves in countries in which the War Graves Commission does not maintain a presence.
The exhibition forms part of the year of commemoration 2014 marking the 100th anniversary of the outbreak of World War I.
The German War Graves Commission, supported by the Federal Foreign Office, also keeps up the website www.100-Jahre-Erster-Weltkrieg.eu
Different development paths
In the course of 2011 autocratic regimes were toppled in Tunisia, Egypt, Libya and Yemen.
Germany’s goal:
strengthening democratic forces
Germany has a strong interest in strengthening democratic forces in all Arab countries.
In the medium term stability and economic development which benefits the entire population can only be created through dialogue, inclusion and implementation of overdue reforms. Repression is not the answer.
To this end Germany offers support in the context of transformation partnerships.
Click here for more on developments in individual countries
Since early 2011 the Arab world has experienced considerable change.
Support for democratic change in Egypt
More than three years after Hosni Mubarak was removed from office, Egypt still faces enormous challenges.
Beginning in Tunisia, where in December 2010 vegetable seller Mohamed Bouazizi set himself alight in Sidi Bouzid to protest against the living conditions there, mass protests against corruption, high unemployment and rising food prices, and in favour of greater political and economic ownership erupted in many Arab countries.
That applies in particular to the country’s economic recovery.
More than three years on, the development paths these countries have followed differ considerably:
During the first official visit to Berlin by Czech Foreign Minister Lubomír Zaorálek, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier addressed the good-neighbourly relations based on mutual trust between Germany and the Czech Republic and stressed the close cooperation within the EU.
25th anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall: “Thank for your help”
Bild: Warm welcome in Berlin
2014 is also a year in which we express our sincere thanks for the help you gave us, which provided crucial impetus and ensured that the peaceful revolution in the GDR led to German unity.
The two Foreign Ministers agreed that this was due to the efforts of the policymakers and civil society in both countries.
including the German-Czech Discussion Forum and the German-Czech Future Fund, which “has done really good work in the years since 1997”.
I am pleased that the Czech Republic has assumed a very active role in the European Union and am delighted, of course, that the country has decided to accede to the fiscal compact.
Zaorálek also praised the mediation efforts by the German, French and Polish Foreign Ministers in Kyiv on 20 and 21 February.
In Tunisia a new, modern constitution entered into force, forming a sound basis for coming elections.
In Egypt, however, there are many indications that a system dominated by the military and beneficiaries of the previous Mubarak regime will be restored.
The security situation in Libya is precarious, and efforts to build a system founded on democratic principles are progressing extremely slowly.
Yemen managed to conclude a National Dialogue on establishing a new order in the country, but there, too, the security and economic situation remains very problematic.
Dietmar Woidke, the German Government’s Coordinator of German-Polish Cooperation and Brandenburg Minister-President, has visited a German-Polish school project at the Georg-Mendheim-Oberstufenzentrum in Zehdenick.
Woidke, who sees intersocietal and cross-border cooperation as the main focus of his work as Coordinator, praised the initiative as exemplary.
In their joint project the participating pupils investigated the start-up process in Poland and Germany.
District Commissioner Schröter also paid tribute to the young people’s efforts:
“Working together like this means learning not only useful knowledge but also intercultural skills.
Schröter pointed out that he and his Polish partner district counterparts as well as the mayors of Siedlce and Biała Podlaska were “very keen to develop our school twinning programme further and so create a truly vibrant partnership.”
In Syria civil war has been raging unabated for three years, which is having a direct impact on neighbouring countries such as Jordan and Lebanon.
Germany actively supports democracy-building in the Arab region.
The help offered is geared to the partner countries’ particular needs and priorities.
A transformation partnership was agreed with Egypt – a country key to the Arab world – in August 2011.
The aim is to support the setting up of democratic institutions and foster the rule of law.
Other key features of the partnership are the intensified cultural dialogue and assistance in the education and vocational training spheres.
Examples of measures within the framework of the transformation partnership with Egypt
Within the context of the National Employment Pact, centres are being established which could serve as models for innovative and efficient vocational training and job placement.
In the education, university and academic spheres, the Federal Foreign Office initiative entitled Place of the Future pools a wide variety of measures such as scholarships and alumni programmes, university cooperation projects, the development of joint master’s programmes as well as research residencies.
The Goethe-Institut is carrying out extensive special programmes to train people active in the cultural and education spheres and to help them build up networks.
This also includes the establishment of a regional network of young activists from countries around the Mediterranean.
A second Tahrir Lounge was opened in the Nile Delta.
A special module for young people from the countries in transition has been added to the CrossCulture internship programme run by the Institute for Foreign Cultural Relations.
In support of free media, funding has been provided for, in particular, basic and further media training for journalists as well as representatives of political parties and governmental institutions.
The situation in Crimea remains tense.
At the same time, diplomatic efforts to resolve the crisis in Crimea continue.
Furthermore, the Federal Foreign Office is supporting Deutsche Welle’s Arab programmes and some co-productions by German and Arab TV channels on education programmes.
Berlin’s Charité Hospital is helping to train Egyptian specialists in forensic medicine.
Political conditions in Egypt have again changed considerably.
President Mohammed Morsi, who was elected in 2012, was removed from office by military leaders on 3 July 2013 following protracted popular protest.
Since then, an interim government under interim President Mansour has been in power.
In view of the recent escalation of the conflict, the Foreign Minister warned on Sunday (9 March) of a “new rift in Europe”.
In the last few days international efforts to defuse the situation in Crimea have been continuing with a vengeance.
Intensive travelling diplomacy
In the past week Foreign Minister Steinmeier has completed an intensive travel itinerary in order to work with European and international partners to find a way out of the recent escalation of the conflict.
This included a meeting with his Russian counterpart Sergey Lavrov as well as with the Foreign Minister of the Ukrainian interim government, Andriy Deshchytsia.
Consultations with his European colleagues and with US Secretary of State John Kerry also centred around the international efforts to defuse the conflict.
Steinmeier and Zaorálek at the joint press conference
Last Thursday (6 March) the European Union heads of state and government condemned the referendum as “illegal”.
Speaking last Friday (7 March) in the presence of his Czech counterpart Lubomír Zaorálek, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier declared that this decision by Russia had “added fuel to the fire”.
On Sunday (9 March), following another phone conversation with Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov, the Foreign Minister described Russia’s position as “relatively inflexible”.
The human rights situation as well as the country’s socio-economic outlook give cause for concern.
At the same time Steinmeier warned against “manoeuvring ourselves into a corner”.
Economic recovery and an improvement in education and vocational training (especially for women) are therefore crucial to the country’s further development.
Support from the EU – the European Neighbourhood Policy
Support from the G8 – the Deauville Partnership
Foreign Minister Steinmeier concerned about dangerous developments in Ukraine
In the past week, during a special summit of the European Union in Brussels, the European heads of state and government agreed on initial steps such as discontinuing visa talks with Russia.
On Sunday (9 March) Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement in this connection:
The first stage is already in place.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier will remain in close consultation with his European partners on this issue over the coming days.
On Tuesday he will hold talks with the foreign ministers and leaders of the three Baltic states – Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.
The focus of the talks is on finding the means to embark on a diplomatic political process in which Ukraine and Russia can discuss first hand how to find a way out of the crisis.
Another important goal of the deliberations is to preserve Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty.
Click here for more information on the Foreign Minister’s talks:
Clear messages to Russia
The announcement last week that a referendum on Crimea joining Russia has been scheduled for 16 March has exacerbated the situation still further.
He went on to say that if the Russian side did not shift its stance in the coming days, “the next stage of sanctions” would be reached.
EU agrees on initial steps
Extensive economic assistance was also earmarked for Ukraine.
Furthermore, during their meeting the European heads of state and government agreed on a three-stage plan to be implemented should no progress be made in resolving the crisis in Crimea.
If we have to threaten to use sanctions, we will impose them in stages.
We have discontinued talks.
The next stage will involve the option of freezing assets and preventing certain power-holders in Russia from travelling by withdrawing their visas.
All in all, projects in the fields of democracy promotion, the rule of law, employment generation, culture/education/media were funded to the tune of around 30 million euros in 2012 and 2013.
The two lounges are meeting places for discussion on political changes in Egypt.
The Muslim Brotherhood and its political arm, the Freedom and Justice Party, were banned and classified as a terrorist organisation.
On Monday evening Foreign Minister Steinmeier will set off at short notice on a trip to the Baltic.
Meeting with UN Secretary-General Ban Ki‑moon in Geneva (4 March 2014)
The crisis in Crimea was also the focus of the Foreign Minister’s talks last week with UN Secretary-General Ban Ki‑moon and OSCE Chair Didier Burkhalter.
The Foreign Minister called for clear and decisive messages to be sent ensuring that Russia understood that “we will respond and we will be obliged to respond if the path of escalation continues to be followed.”
If it came to this, “a road of escalating sanctions” must be designed in such a way that exits still remained open at all times.
Persevering with efforts to bring about a de‑escalation
Topics will include the future of the European Union and the role of the constitutional courts in Germany and Portugal.
the two countries will be pit against each other in the group matches.
With regard to the economic crisis he expressed his thanks for the “solidarity and help which Germany consistently offered”.
For his part, Foreign Minister Steinmeier expressed great recognition for the efforts made by Portugal and the Portuguese people:
Teasertext: Germany and Tunisia have agreed to cooperate closely in order to jointly advance democratic transformation in the country following the collapse of the Ben Ali regime.
In Tallinn, the German Foreign Minister will meet President Ilves and Foreign Minister Paet on Tuesday morning.
He will then travel on to Riga and Vilnius for further high-level talks on political issues.
The Federal Foreign Office has established a work unit to coordinate the German Government’s efforts to support North Africa and to identify suitable measures.
In the light of the dramatic developments unfolding in Ukraine and the crisis in Crimea in particular, Foreign Minister Steinmeier is coordinating closely with international and European partners.
A wide variety of topics
Close partnership with the Baltic states
In further panel discussions, possibilities for cooperation between the two countries in the fields of reform policies and competitiveness will also be discussed.
The Federal Foreign Office’s key cooperation partners were the Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ), the Goethe-Institut, the German Academic Exchange Service, the political foundations as well as a number of NGOs.
The Tahrir Lounge was opened on the premises of the Goethe-Institut in Cairo in April 2011.
A new constitution was adopted in a referendum in January 2014.
Presidential elections are to take place in April 2014.
The current Defence Minister al-Sisi is considered to have a good chance of winning.
“On their way into the European Union, the Baltic states mastered numerous challenges.
On his arrival in Tallinn on Monday morning, Foreign Minister Steinmeier said that the three Baltic states were “an important part of Europe and had soon after their independence become firm anchors of the European community of values”.
Before their independence in 1991, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania were part of the Soviet Union.
To discuss the situation in Ukraine and possible “European responses”, Foreign Minister Steinmeier will get together with President Toomas Hendrik Ilves and Foreign Minister Urmas Paet in Tallinn.
More information on relations between Germany and Portugal
2nd German‑Portuguese Forum in Berlin from 10 to11 March 2014
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and his Portuguese counterpart Rui Machete have opened the second German‑Portuguese Forum, with around 200 participants, in the Federal Foreign Office.
2nd German‑Portuguese Forum in Berlin
From 10 to 11 March, the German‑Portuguese Forum offers a broad base to strengthen the dialogue between the two countries.
The Foreign Ministers Steinmeier (left) and Machete (right)
“Two Partners for Europe” – that is the motto of the second German‑Portuguese Forum which is currently taking place at the Federal Foreign Office.
Foreign Minister Frank‑Walter Steinmeier and his Portuguese counterpart Rui Machete gave the opening speeches.
Steinmeier opened by joking about the upcoming FIFA World Cup, which could place a strain on good German‑Portuguese relations –
Portugal’s economy is gaining momentum
Machete began his speech in German and then changed to his native language to praise German‑Portuguese relations as very “intensive”, “friendly” and “close”.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier opens the German‑Portuguese Forum
“The current financial assistance programme in Portugal is coming to an end. I believe that we have more than just a chance of overcoming the economic crisis.”
The EU and International Monetary Fund (IMF)s’ financial assistance programme for Portugal runs out on 17 May 2014.
According to experts, the signs that the country will be able to make a successful return to financial markets are positive.
Around 200 participants from Germany and Portugal came to Berlin to discuss a wide variety of topics.
Among others, the judges Peter M. Huber (Germany) and Joaquim Coelho de Sousa Ribeiro (Portugal) will take part in a discussion about the role of the constitutional courts in Germany and Portugal on European integration.
Around 200 participants in the Europasaal
German and Portuguese perspectives on the transatlantic partnership and possible reforms of the EU institutions are also on the agenda.
State Secretaries Jörg Asmussen (Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, Berlin) and Bruno Maçães, responsible for European Affairs in Lisbon, will give the concluding speeches on 11 March.
German‑Portuguese exchange
The first German‑Portuguese Forum took place in Lisbon in January 2013.
The event is organised by the Portuguese Institute of International Relations (IPRI‑UNL), the
Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation in Lisbon as well as by the Institute for European Politics (IEP) in Berlin.
IEP Managing Director Mathias Jopp voiced the hope that the meeting would become an annual event.
The partnership aims to improve the coordination of international political and financial support for transition processes in Tunisia, Egypt, Libya, Morocco, Jordan and Yemen.
consultation with Baltic partners
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier travelled to the Baltic states on Monday evening for political consultations.
All his meetings will focus on the situation in Ukraine and ways of dealing with the crisis in Crimea.
On his arrival in Estonia, Steinmeier stressed that he took seriously and shared the Baltic states’ concerns.
Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Paet in Berlin (6 February)
To this end, Steinmeier will have talks with Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania – close partners in both the EU and NATO – on Tuesday.
For this, they deserve our recognition and respect,” Steinmeier went on.
There are quantitatively significant Russian-speaking minorities in all three countries.
In recent days, these countries have been particularly concerned about current developments in Ukraine and Russia’s actions with regard to Crimea.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier sympathised:
We share responsibility today as partners in the EU and NATO.
We share the concerns of our Baltic partners regarding the situation in Ukraine and Crimea and we take them very seriously.
He will then travel on to Riga for talks with President Andris Bērziņš and Foreign Minister Edgars Rinkēvičs.
Steinmeier will also have discussions with Lithuanian President Dalia Grybauskaité in Vilnius.
Moreover, the German Government approved the conversion of Tunisian debts, releasing up to 60 million euros for jointly agreed projects and reforms.
More on support from the European Union
Again in 2014, funds are being made available for transformation partnerships.
Support within the EU context – the European Neighbourhood Policy
Approximately 450 million euros were made available for Tunisia from the European Neighbourhood Policy for the period 2001-2013.
In late 2013, Tunisia was granted the status of EBRD country of operations together with Morocco and Jordan.
The partnership also holds annual meetings of foreign ministers and finance ministers.
It also places a strong focus on civil society.
Germany will serve as chair of the Deauville Partnership in 2015.
The EU Commission wants to cooperate closely with the Council of Europe in Strasbourg in questions of the rule of law.
Their problems are our problems, too.
We are going to support this important initiative and encourage the EU institutions to work intensively to take it forward.
Common, objective and binding standards help to ensure that our fundamental values are consistently and fully observed throughout the EU.
This shared foundation is the essence of what Europe represents in the wider world.
This makes it clear that the European Union is not only a single internal market but above all a union of values and solidarity.
Michael Roth, Minister of State at the Federal Foreign Office, issued the following statement in Berlin:
With the “framework to safeguard the rule of law” the EU Commission has put forward a promising proposal which aims to strengthen the foundation of our European values.
How and in which way we will do so will be discussed by European Foreign Ministers very carefully and responsibly.
Roth: Working together for Europe’s future
Discussions between the Minister of State and his counterparts from Hungary, the Czech Republic and Slovenia focused primarily on European cooperation and how to tackle the crisis in Ukraine.
On Monday Minister of State Roth exchanged views with colleagues from Central and Eastern Europe.
In the capitals of the three Baltic states I conveyed the German Government’s message that we understand the concerns of the people in Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania about political developments in Ukraine and their fear that uncertainty will also spread to other areas of the European Union.
They discussed Albania’s steps towards the European Union (EU).
Minister of State Roth meets the Albanian Minister of European Integration, Gjosha
The discussion focussed on Albania’s steps towards the EU, the current domestic challenges in the country and regional relations in the Western Balkans.
Minister of State Roth emphasised that the EU would be able to take a decision regarding the status of candidate country when Albania had made further progress in implementing reforms – in particular in the fight against corruption and organised crime.
Union of values
Discussions on Albania’s steps towards the EU
Roth highlighted that the EU was first and foremost a union of common values, such as the rule of law, democracy and freedom.
After the talks the Minister of State commented as follows:
This was the only way for the EU enlargement process to act as a motor for democracy, the rule of law, social cohesion, economic strength and regional reconciliation, said Roth.
In particular, Minister Gjosha made the case for Albania to be awarded the status of EU candidate country.
“The German Government supports the EU prospects of all the countries of the Western Balkans.
Nonetheless fulfilling the relevant criteria for each step towards the EU is a pre-requisite for accession.”
On his trip to the Baltic capitals, Foreign Minister Steinmeier gives assurances that Germany shares people’s concerns in view of the Crimea crisis and that they do not stand alone.
we share the concerns of our Baltic partners
On his trip to the three Baltic capitals, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier has sought close liaison on the situation in Ukraine and further responses to the Crimea crisis.
The people of the Baltic states, he said, did no stand alone; their concerns were shared by their partners in Europe.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier with his Estonian counterpart, Urmas Paet, in Tallinn (11 March)
The German Foreign Minister places special emphasis on finding a joint European response.
To that end, Steinmeier engaged in intensive talks with Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania – close partners in both the EU and NATO – on Tuesday (11 March).
The German Foreign Minister began his Tallinn visit with a morning meeting with President Toomas Hendrik Ilves and Foreign Minister Urmas Paet.
Having last met his Estonian opposite number in Berlin little more than a month ago, he described these talks in Tallinn as a continuation – albeit under different circumstances given the serious movement towards crisis in recent days.
Tallinn by night
Firm anchors of the European community of values
On his arrival in the Estonian capital on Monday morning, Foreign Minister Steinmeier said that the three Baltic states were “an important part of Europe and had soon after their independence become firm anchors of the European community of values”.
During their discussions, Steinmeier and his hosts left no doubt about how very good and close bilateral relations are.
The situation in Ukraine also featured prominently in all discussions.
Continuing to expand European cooperation
Minister of State Roth welcomes the EU Commission’s proposal on safeguarding the rule of law in Europe
Today (11 March), in Strasbourg the European Union Commission issued a press statement on a “framework to safeguard the rule of law” in the European Union.
Moreover, the initiative makes an important contribution to social cohesion.
Background information:
Today, the EU Commission issued a number of statements on the future of Justice and Home Affairs policy in the European Union.
The press release on a “framework to safeguard the rule of law” picks up on a German initiative that has already received broad support in the German Bundestag.
The Council on General Affairs will discuss the topic on 18 March.
Taking German-Estonian relations as an example, Steinmeier emphasised that they were not limited to European topics, having matured into valuable ties in the almost 25 years since independence.
Will not leave the Baltic states to face their concerns alone
Talks in Tallinn with President Ilves (11 March 2014)
There are large Russian-speaking minorities in all three countries.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier expressed understanding for this, saying, “We share responsibility today as partners in the EU and NATO.
Slovenia’s State Secretary Senčar with Minister of State Roth
Speaking about the European stance on the Crimea crisis, Steinmeier concluded that there was agreement within the EU on jointly seeking diplomatic ways of resolving the conflict “as long and as intensively as possible”.
He said the EU had “not been aiming for confrontation” but endeavouring to avoid it.
Unacceptable under international law for Crimea to break away
Steinmeier with Latvian Foreign Minister Edgars Rinkēvičs
Foreign Minister Steinmeier takes stock of his trip to the Baltic states
At the end of his trip to the Baltic region Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement in Vilnius today (11 March):
I have come here to tell them
that we will not leave the people in the Baltic states to face their fears alone.
If they are concerned, Europe must also be concerned.
We, as members of the European Union, jointly declare
that secession of Crimea from Ukraine is unacceptable under international law and requires a response from us.
The EU member states agreed that we want to jointly seek diplomatic ways to resolve the conflict within Ukraine and de-escalate the conflict between Ukraine and Russia as long and as intensively as possible.
Now Russia must decide whether there is still a final chance to look for and find solutions.
If the process of separating Crimea from Ukraine continues and the referendum to be held at the weekend produces a result that is used to cut off Crimea from the Ukrainian state and incorporate it into Russian territory, we in Europe will, of course, have to respond.
We will make all the necessary preparations for any further decisions that may have to be taken by the European heads of government.
Following his talks in Tallinn, Steinmeier travelled on to Riga in the morning, where he met President Andris Bērziņš and Foreign Minister Edgars Rinkēvičs for talks.
Afterwards, he underscored the EU member states’ agreement that it would be “unacceptable under international law” for Crimea to break away.
As recently as 7 March Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier met his Czech Foreign Minister colleague Lubomír Zaorálek in Berlin.
Minister of State Roth met Klajda Gjosha, the Albanian Minister of European Integration, today (11 March).
Steinmeier also urged Russia to change course and “use the last possibilities that still remain to achieve a diplomatic solution, or at least de-escalate tensions”.
Without that, he concluded, things between Europe and Russia would not be able to just carry on as before.
Responsibly preparing the European response
In the afternoon, Foreign Minister Steinmeier was in Lithuania for further talks.
He met President Dalia Grybauskaité in Vilnius and used the opportunity for extensive talks in private.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier talking to Lithuania’s President Grybauskaité
Steinmeier’s visit to the Lithuanian capital fell on an auspicious day.
The two partners also discussed ways of strengthening the role of the monthly General Affairs Council.
Roth and his Czech counterpart Prouza
Ukraine and the Crimea crisis the focus of attention
Every year, 11 March is celebrated as the Day of Restoration of Independence from the former Soviet Union, with a national holiday and numerous commemorative events.
This year’s celebrations reflected what had been happening in Ukraine.
At the beginning of the morning ceremony, for example, there was a moment of remembrance for the victims of Independence Square.
At the end of his trip, Foreign Minister Steinmeier looked to the coming days in the political crisis surrounding the Crimean peninsula, which are likely to be significant:
His first meeting in the morning was with Igor Senčar, State Secretary of the Slovenian Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Press conference in Riga
The focus of Senčar’s first official visit was on current European issues and EU external relations as well as bilateral cooperation.
Subsequent meetings with Hungary’s Minister of State for European Affairs Enikö Györi and the Czech State Secretary for European Affairs Tomáš Prouza likewise centred on European cooperation.
Ten years have now passed since Slovenia, Hungary and the Czech Republic joined the European Union.
What that meant in detail, he went on, was something to be discussed “by European Foreign Ministers very carefully and responsibly”.
The talks in Berlin on 10 March between Minister of State for Europe Roth and his three opposite numbers therefore focused primarily on cooperation in the area of European policy.
They would “make all the necessary preparations for any further decisions that may have to be taken by the European heads of government”, Steinmeier explained.
In view of the coming elections for the European Parliament the Minister of State specifically used the talks as an opportunity to exchange opinions on the future of Europe.
During his political talks, Steinmeier assured his Estonian, Latvian and Lithuanian partners that the German Government shared people’s concerns in view of political developments, understood the issue of Crimea breaking away and took that issue seriously.
In talks with his Hungarian counterpart Györi on this subject, Roth expressed his hopes of a high turnout for the elections.
They also discussed fears of a strong result for Eurosceptic groups in May,
emphasising that remaining silent in the face of populist sound bites was not an option. Instead, they should be challenged with sound arguments.
During talks with his Slovenian colleague Senčar, Roth praised the country’s efforts to tackle its difficult budget situation without outside help.
He said that important initial reforms had been implemented and that the goal must now be to actively push forward structural reforms and strengthen social cohesion.
The partners also talked about their joint engagement in overcoming the crisis of trust in Europe.
The meeting between Minister of State Roth and his Czech counterpart Prouza was the second of its kind with colleagues from Prague in a matter of days.
Together with Prouza, Roth called for stronger European engagement to protect basic European values and stressed the social importance of a united Europe:
We want to see a Europe which is committed to social cohesion and social justice.
This is also the message we want to convey to Europeans in the European Parliament elections in May.
Another topic of discussion concerned foreign policy issues.
Minister of State Roth and his Central and Eastern European interlocutors discussed the problematic situation in Ukraine and the Crimea crisis specifically in the context of EU external relations.
Hungary currently holds the rotating Presidency of the Visegrad Group.
In this context Györi underscored that the future success of the EU was largely dependent on whether it continued to speak with one voice.
With our Czech neighbours we stand for a Europe which is once again regarded by its citizens as a troubleshooter, not a troublemaker.
In her talks with Roth, Minister of State Györi spotlighted the initiatives of the so‑called V4 for Ukraine and the meeting of the Visegrad members – Hungary, the Czech Republic, Slovakia and Poland – in Budapest this coming Thursday.
Supporting change in the Arab world: the G8’s Deauville Partnership
The year 2011 witnessed upheavals in a number of Arab countries. In response, the G8 launched the Deauville Partnership at its May 2011 summit in Deauville, France.
The partnership also works to strengthen links with important regional partners (including Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates) and to ensure coordination with international financial institutions such as the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank as well as other key international organisations (including the OECD, UNDP, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, European Investment Bank, Islamic Development Bank and African Development Bank).
Russia holds the G8 Presidency in 2014, which means that it is also chairing the Deauville Partnership this year.
The coordination of international financial institutions and development banks is currently being headed up by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier on the rocket attacks on Israel
We strongly condemn yesterday’s rocket attacks fired at Israel from Gaza.
I am pleased that they did not result in any injuries.
The calculations of those responsible for these acts of terrorism, who hope that these attacks will torpedo the difficult and still fragile peace process, must be proved wrong.
The negotiations on peace in the Middle East are in a difficult phase.
All sides need to make even greater efforts.
We fully support the American efforts in the negotiations with Israel and the Palestinians.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement today (13 March) on the rocket attacks on Israel:
High-level panel discussion on the First World War
Along with the more than one hundred members of the Group of Friends of the Syrian People, the German Government regards the National Coalition as the legitimate representatives of the Syrian people.
The event will be entirely in German.
The German Government established the Syria Recovery Trust Fund in collaboration with the United Arab Emirates and the United States.
The contributors and the National Coalition of the Syrian Opposition jointly decide how the money is allocated to particular reconstruction projects.
The audience will have an opportunity to take part in the subsequent discussion about the failure of and need for diplomacy during these decisive weeks.
Peter Sturm of the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung will moderate the evening.
Among other works, Christopher Clark wrote the much-discussed book “The Sleepwalkers. How Europe Went to War in 1914”.
The meeting will focus on the conflict in Ukraine.
He went on to say that the meeting in Budapest would discuss “how to react appropriately, intelligently and responsibly to the Russian side’s actions.”
Poland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia formed the group in Visegrad, Hungary in 1991.
In his reply, the historian Prof. Gerd Krumeich (University of Düsseldorf, professor emeritus) will look at Clark’s theses.
Krumeich is one of the most renowned German scholars on the history of the First World War and is also academic adviser to the French Government’s Commission on the centenary of the outbreak of the First World War.
Diplomatic efforts continue
Bild: Press conference in Riga
The Minister went on to say that Russia must decide whether there was still a final chance to look for and find solutions.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier, in collaboration with Prof. Alexander Koch, the President of the German Historical Museum Foundation, is hosting a debate on Friday, 14 March on the failure of diplomacy one hundred years ago.
Following an introduction by Foreign Minister Steinmeier, the historian Prof. Christopher Clark (University of Cambridge) will give a lead-in speech examining the leitmotiv of the evening:
Coordination with European partners
“Foreign Minister Steinmeier travelled to Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania at the beginning of the week to advocate a “united” and “resolute” European position in the Crimea crisis.
In his discussions Steinmeier gave assurances that the European partners shared the concerns of people in the Baltic region.”
In light of the dangerous developments in Crimea and in Ukraine, Foreign Minister Steinmeier continues his in-depth consultations with Germany’s partners.
Representatives from Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania had been expressing particular concern recently – partly due to their own painful experiences in the days of the Soviet Union and their large Russian-speaking minorities.
First stop was the Baltic metropolis, Tallinn.
Talking to Estonia’s President Ilves, Steinmeier made it clear that Germany and the EU stand firmly at their Baltic partners’ side.
Visegrad Group: this association of Central European countries is named after the city in which it was founded.
The aim of their cooperation was to integrate its members into the structures of the European Union and NATO.
Hungary currently holds the Presidency, which rotates every six months.
(...) As Europeans and members of NATO, we also share the desire to work together in solidarity.
The next leg of Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s trip took him to Riga.
The Minister will return to Berlin in the evening.
This must not be a problem for the Baltic alone, rather we must view and address this as a problem for Europe as a whole.
we have rejected this correction of borders and consider it to be fully unacceptable.
Steinmeier left no doubt over the European’s resolute position.
At the end of his trip, the German Foreign Minister clearly reiterated:
If and when this is no longer possible, we will also be prepared to make decisions on the next steps and on harsher sanctions.
In the evening he returned to Berlin.
The danger of a division of Europe still exists.
Within our relations we show our respect for the courage and commitment with which the Estonian people have taken their future into their own hands over a good two decades.
Asked about Europe’s position on Russia in this highly complex and volatile situation, Steinmeier urged, along with his Latvian counterpart, Rinkēvičs, that:
Europe has been united in this issue from the outset:
Here, the focus was above all on European responses and the question of further sanctions.
Together with his partners, Foreign Minister Steinmeier will continue to advocate de-escalation and a united European position.
On the way to visit Latvia’s President Bērziņš there was a new development in Crimea –
People in the Baltic states consider this to be the right course of action as much as we do.
In the context of the Ukraine crisis diplomacy, Foreign Minister Steinmeier will meet the Slovak, Polish, Hungarian and Czech Foreign Ministers on Thursday to discuss the Russian-Ukrainian conflict in the Crimea.
On Monday (17 March), the Foreign Ministers of all 28 EU states will meet again in Brussels.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier travels for talks with the Visegrad Group
Foreign Minister Steinmeier is taking part in the meeting of Foreign Ministers from the Visegrad Group (Poland, Slovakia, Czech Republic, Hungary) in Budapest on Thursday, 13 March.
Federal Foreign Office Spokesperson Martin Schäfer said in Berlin on Wednesday (12 March) that the members of the Visegrad Group (V4) were close partners and “especially affected by this conflict.”
At the beginning of the week, Foreign Minister Steinmeier visited the Baltic States and stressed once more that the search for diplomatic solutions would continue.
At the same time the European Union was preparing for further decisions – should the referendum in the Crimea scheduled for 16 March be used to integrate the peninsula into Russian territory.
In Budapest, Foreign Minister Steinmeier will first of all take part in the meeting of V4 Foreign Ministers in the afternoon.
Afterwards, the Foreign Ministers will have talks with Hungary’s Prime Minister Viktor Orbán.
At the beginning of the week he travelled to the Baltic states on short notice to offer support and to work on a joint European response.
At the joint press conference with his Estonian counterpart Paet, he continued:
the peninsula’s regional parliament declared its independence from Ukraine in the run-up to the so-called referendum scheduled for this Sunday.
We will use the last remaining possibilities to achieve a diplomatic solution which aims to de-escalate the situation in Ukraine.
In an interview with deutschland.de, Foreign Minister Steinmeier talks about the significance of the European elections and his commitment to an active German foreign policy.
The interview was conducted by Janet Schayan.
Reproduced with the kind permission of DE Deutschland Magazin.
In an interview with deutschland.de, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier talks about the significance of the European elections and his commitment to a better Europe and an active German foreign policy.
Referring to the commemorative year of 2014, Steinmeier cautions that peace and prosperity in Europe must not be taken for granted.
Europe needs a strong European Parliament.
And the European Parliament needs a strong democratic mandate from the citizens of Europe.
Nevertheless, voter turnout for European elections is usually very low.
Do EU citizens have a low level of appreciation for the increasing importance and the functions of the European Parliament?
To have a democratic Europe, we need a lively dialogue between voters and their representatives.
For the first time, the European parties will be nominating lead candidates for the 2014 elections, and I hope this will mobilise more voters.
Would that be a slap in the face of the European idea?
And this has led to a marked loss of trust in recent years.
This is a development that affects Europe, but you can see it in other countries as well.
Public surveys make this clear:
This populism is not only a slap in the face of the European idea, but also of all the reasonable efforts that are being made to improve European competitiveness while simultaneously safeguarding social cohesion.
What convincing arguments can be made nowadays for “more Europe”?
I too think that the EU needs to become better and stronger.
The Economic and Monetary Union needs further reforms in order to make the euro genuinely “future-proof.”
On the other hand, Europe thrives on its diversity.
Do you see light at the end of the tunnel?
Wherever things can be managed better at the national or regional level, the EU should pull back.
A Europe that is close to the people must be able to incorporate this truth as well.
We can make these arguments soundly and objectively, and with enthusiasm and conviction.
Despite the progress that has been made, the economic crisis in Europe has not yet been overcome.
Southern EU member states in particular continue to suffer.
The balance is tilting again towards growth. Reforms have been launched, and budgets have been consolidated.
Yes, I do see light.
But we must not let this weaken our resolve.
Improved economic figures alone do not mean that the job is done.
A lot of people have suffered in recent years.
Now our priority must be to give the people in Europe renewed confidence that together we have what it takes to be a continent with a promising future.
Cohesion and solidarity among the member states of the European Union are the equipment we need to carry us forward on this path.
Like Federal President Gauck, you recently called for Germany to play a more active role in international foreign policy.
What do you mean by this specifically?
We should be prepared to get involved in key foreign and security policy matters both earlier and more decisively.
Taking international responsibility always involves concrete action.
The historians Christopher Clark and Gerd Krumeich are taking part in the discussion.
In the Schlüterhof of the German Historical Museum the historians Christopher Clark and Gerd Krumeich will discuss how the escalation in the July Crisis in 1914 came about.
Following an introduction by the Foreign Minister, the historian Prof. Christopher Clark (University of Cambridge) will give a lead-in speech examining the leitmotiv of the evening:
how did the escalation in the July Crisis in 1914 come about and what role did “sleepwalking diplomats” play?
Clark and Krumeich in discussion
Trigger of the July Crisis:
the attack on the Austrian heir to the throne in Sarajevo in 1914
In his reply to the lead-in speech, the historian Prof. Gerd Krumeich (University of Düsseldorf, professor emeritus) will look at Clark’s theses.
The audience will have an opportunity to take part in the subsequent discussion about the failure of and need for diplomacy during these decisive weeks in 1914.
Peter Sturm of the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung will moderate the event.
This is a targeted contribution to the solution of a specific problem.
Europe will be able to make a difference in the world only if European countries pool their collective strengths.
In this spirit, we are also implementing concrete measures to support fragile states in Africa, such as Mali and the Central African Republic.
The use of military force must always and only be an instrument of last resort.
Injured Ukrainians to be treated in Germany
Following violent protests in Kyiv’s Independence Square (Maidan), injured Ukrainian citizens are to receive medical treatment in Germany.
The first 24 patients arrived in Berlin on 12 March.
During the violent protests in Kyiv’s Independence Square on 18 and 20 February, nearly one hundred people lost their lives and many more were severely injured.
The Federal Government pledged to support Ukraine in caring for the injured:
the first 24 patients arrived in a Bundeswehr (armed forces) airplane in Berlin on 12 March,
where they were welcomed by the Federal Government’s Human Rights Commissioner, Christoph Strässer.
The Bundeswehr’s “MedEvac” Airbus, which is effectively a flying intensive care unit, landed at Berlin’s Tegel airport on Wednesday afternoon.
After the plane had come to a halt on the runway, not only a door but a whole section of the front of the aircraft opened in order to enable the patients to be taken out of the plane.
Medical personnel from the Bundeswehr used a lifting platform to carefully lower the patients onto the runway and then took them to the ambulances waiting to take them to the Charité and Vivantes hospitals where they will receive treatment.
12 of the 24 patients are staying in Berlin, the remaining 12 were later flown to Ulm and Constance.
Positive and important signal
Federal Government’s Human Rights Commissioner, Christoph Strässer.
Before the arrival of the injured in Berlin, Strässer said he was pleased that it had been possible to arrange the treatment of 24 injured persons from Ukraine in German hospitals.
In light of the political dimension of the conflict, he continued, it was important not to lose sight of the humanitarian situation in the country.
In front of journalists and television cameras at Tegel airport, Strässer stated:
That we are prepared to assume responsibility and help wherever possible sends a strong message.
This does not resolve the situation in Ukraine but it is a valuable sign that this is not just a matter of discussing and solving important political issues but also of helping the people affected.
I would particularly like to thank not only the Bundeswehr but also the facilities here in Germany that have agreed to care for and treat the injured.
Many participants in the protests on Independence Square have gunshot or shell splinter wounds for which highly specialised hospitals in Germany offer treatment methods with good prospects.
Among the patients are Maidan activists as well as severely injured police officers.
Up to 40 severely injured persons coming to Germany
The Federal Government’s humanitarian engagement is in response to the Ukrainian parliament’s appeal to the German Embassy in Kyiv to support Ukraine in caring for and treating people severely injured in the violent clashes.
The Federal Foreign Office and the Federal Ministry of Defence, as well as the Victor Pinchuk Foundation in Ukraine will each assume part of the transport and treatment costs.
A total of up to 40 injured people are to be treated in Germany, starting with those who need treatment most urgently.
Solidarity is a matter of course
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier issued the following statement on Sunday (9 March) concerning the admission of injured Ukrainians:
What happened in Independence Square in Kyiv on 18 and 20 February is tragic.
Nearly one hundred people lost their lives and almost one thousand were severely injured when Ukrainians fired at each other in Maidan Square.
The impact this will have on Ukraine’s future is as yet unknown.
However, we want to help those injured to be able once more to live as happy and normal a life as possible.
Minister of Defence Ursula von der Leyen, too, said it was a matter of course for Germany to demonstrate solidarity with the people in Ukraine and help those injured in Independence Square.
Humanitarian commitment and diplomatic efforts
Steinmeier in Riga on 11 March
The Federal Government’s humanitarian commitment to Ukraine accompanies the diplomatic efforts to bring about a solution to the Crimea crisis.
Last weekend, Foreign Minister Steinmeier warned of “a new rift in Europe”.
Through intense travel diplomacy last week he, together with European and international partners, endeavoured to find a way to defuse the recent escalation of the conflict.
Crimea crisis:
However, we must differentiate between exercising restraint and sitting on the fence.
Germany is simply too big to do the latter.
What I want to do is use the toolbox of diplomacy more actively, creatively, courageously and comprehensively.
In 2014, many countries are commemorating the outbreak of the First World War 100 years ago.
In a widely read article, you reflected on the “failure of diplomacy” at that time.
Krumeich is one of the most renowned German scholars on the history of the First World War. In addition to this he is also academic adviser to the scientific committee of the French Government’s First World War Centenary Partnership Program.
It is our good fortune that diplomacy today has other means at its disposal.
But even though we sometimes take peace and prosperity for granted in Europe today, we must not deceive ourselves!
Just a few months before the
July crisis occurred in 1914, most people considered the outbreak of war impossible.
In view of the current crises, it is crucial for us to realise:
safeguarding peace and prosperity requires hard work.
Smart foreign policy that respects the interests of partners and undertakes a level-headed assessment of potential consequences is more important than ever.
Forecasts indicate that Eurosceptics from the right and left, whose voices are especially loud in certain countries, could enter the European Parliament with over 20 percent of the EU-wide vote.
You can meet your local mayor at the market square, but what about parliament members who gather in Brussels or Strasbourg and who conduct their deliberations in over 20 languages?
But each of the 750 members of the European Parliament represents a specific region – their issues are our issues!
This is the first time that the European elections will “have a face”, so to speak, as is normal in national elections.
Steinmeier in talks with the Visegrad Group
That doesn’t mean that you have to be satisfied with the Euruopean status quo in order to vote in the European elections.
The meeting focused on the conflict in Ukraine.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier in talks with the Visegrad Group
Germany has offered to destroy residual waste from Syria’s chemical weapons at German facilities.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier took part in the meeting of the Foreign Ministers of Poland, the Czech Republic, Hungary and Slovakia in Budapest on Thursday.
In view of the numerous crises that are currently smouldering around the world, is diplomacy smarter today than it was back then?
Bild: Steinmeier on his way to Budapest
Today’s world is full of friction and conflicts of interest; it is vulnerable.
Bild: View of Budapest
“We don’t want a confrontation with Russia, rather we’re looking for ways to cooperate.”
Steinmeier went on to say that what was happening was more than the “threat of a new division in Europe” after 25 years of European integration.
Looking to the coming weeks and months, we were faced with an “extremely dangerous situation”.
Furthermore, the Crimea crisis was not the only focus of Germany and its international partners, stated Steinmeier.
“It goes without saying that we mustn’t lose sight of the core matter:
That’s not easy in the current situation.
Not for an interim government which has just taken up office.
Further measures by the EU?
Steinmeier said that if the referendum on the secession of Crimea takes place as planned on Sunday then further measures would be agreed on at this meeting.
On Friday (14 March), Foreign Minister Steinmeier is hosting a debate on the July 1914 Crisis in the German Historical Museum.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier, in collaboration with Alexander Koch, the President of the German Historical Museum Foundation, is hosting a debate on Friday (14 March) on the July 1914 Crisis.
Among other works, Christopher Clark wrote the much-discussed book “The Sleepwalkers. How Europe Went to War in 1914.”
The close and intensive coordination with international partners will continue in the coming days.
That’s why they are watching events with concern, some even with a sense of imminent threat.
We want today’s visit to send the message that these are not only Hungarian, Polish, Slovak or Czech but also European concerns, and thus also our concerns.
It’s therefore good that we met today.”
At the beginning of the week, Foreign Minister Steinmeier visited the Baltic States and stressed once more that the search for diplomatic solutions would continue undiminished.
“I believe we can rightly say that we have not been seeking confrontation but have undertaken diplomatic efforts to avoid it.”
that’s support for Ukraine itself.
Not for a European neighbourhood which now has to explore with which structures it can work sufficiently reliably in the Ukraine to ensure that the assistance granted really does improve people’s situation.”
“We will meet on Monday to decide on the second phase of instruments and measures needed now.”
Steinmeier went on to say that if Russia’s interests went beyond the Crimea and the government in Moscow refused to bring about de-escalation, then “a third phase of measures would be necessary”.
Foreign Minister Frank‑Walter Steinmeier took part in the meeting of Foreign Ministers from the Visegrad Group (Poland, Slovakia, Czech Republic, Hungary) in Budapest on Thursday.
In the context of the Ukraine crisis diplomacy, Foreign Minister Steinmeier met his counterparts from the Visegrad Group on Thursday (13 March) to discuss the Russian-Ukrainian conflict in the Crimea.
Steinmeier pointed out at the subsequent joint press conference that the countries in the Visegrad Group (V4) were observing developments in Ukraine with even more sensitivity and in the light of historical events.
“People in these countries still remember Budapest 1956, Prague 1968 and Gdansk 1981.
Steinmeier also highlighted the joint efforts by the EU member states to find a diplomatic solution to the Crimean conflict.
Visegrad Group – this association of Central European countries is named after the city in which it was founded.
However, all efforts to bring about international formats had been unsuccessful to date, reiterated Steinmeier today in Budapest.
Bild: Visegrad Group Foreign Ministers after the consultations with Foreign Minister Steinmeier
On Monday (17 March), the Foreign Ministers of all 28 EU states will meet again in Brussels.
A meeting between US Secretary of State Kerry and Russia’s Foreign Minister Lavrov is due to take place in London on Friday.
International assistance for Mali – an overview
Bild: The town of Gao
The international community is continuing to assist Mali at various levels after the return to constitutional order following the presidential elections in August 2013 and the parliamentary elections at the end of 2013.
The focus is on the political process.
The German Government also considers a political solution central to the country’s long-term stability and national reconciliation.
Multifaceted international support
French troops have been in Mali as part of a combat operation since 11 January 2013.
January 2013 also saw the start of the African-led Support Mission in Mali (AFISMA).
As of 1 July 2013, their tasks were taken on by the UN mission MINUSMA, the establishment of which was decided by the UN Security Council on 25 April 2013.
MINUSMA is to make an extensive contribution towards bringing stability to Mali.
Fighting between Government troops and Tuareg rebels broke out in the north of Mali in January 2012.
The situation was then exacerbated by a coup in March 2012, in which sections of the military overthrew President Touré.
Islamist groups managed to gain control of large parts of northern Mali during the coup and the related unrest.
They advanced southward at the beginning of 2013, prompting France to respond to the Malian Government’s request for intervention.
Bild: Malian soldiers receiving Bundeswehr training as part of EUTM
Bild: Unloading a German Transall plane in Bamako
The EUTM Mali mandate includes advising the Malian armed forces and providing training for soldiers.
The mission’s members do not participate in combat missions.
Germany’s involvement in the mission concentrates mainly on training army engineers and providing medical support.
Bundeswehr mission in Mali expanded (20 February 2014)
At the same time, Germany is also engaged in humanitarian relief efforts to improve conditions for people in Mali as well as the many refugees.
Bild: Children in Mali
Germany has also taken steps to assist its Malian partners in their efforts to combat the problem of landmines.
For instance, the German Ambassador in Bamako has handed over more than 100,000 euros’ worth of body armour and mine detectors to the Ministry of Internal Security and Civil Protection.
Security Council resolutions
The legal basis for this international intervention is provided by decisions taken by the United Nations Security Council.
The resolution calls on all countries to support these objectives.
Resolution 2071 (2012) of 12 October 2012 also sees the Security Council pledge support for the planning of an international military operation as well as calling on regional and international partners to help improve the capabilities of Mali’s army.
Security Council Resolution on MINUSMA, 25 April 2013
Motion tabled by the Federal Government on the deployment of German armed forces to participate in the EU-led training mission EUTM Mali PDF | 127 KB
Motion tabled by the Federal Government on the deployment of German armed forces to assist the African-led International Support Mission (AFISMA) in Mali PDF | 119 KB
EU Foreign Affairs Council conclusions on Mali, 18 February 2013 (PDF, 91 KB)
The Sahel will remain the focus of German humanitarian assistance.
Furrther improvement of the returnee situation is of key importance to us.
Germany has pledged Mali around 100 million euros for 2013 and 2014 for development cooperation in the priority areas agriculture, drinking water/sewerage disposal and decentralisation.
They continue to fight against terrorist groups.
“You can have an impact only if you get involved”
Minister Steinmeier, in late May the citizens of the European Union’s 28 member states will be voting for a new European Parliament.
What significance does this election have for Europe’s future?
That’s because the decisions we take in Europe together with the European Parliament and the European Commission have a direct impact on everyone’s daily lives.
For example, thanks to EU legislation, we can make mobile phone calls from anywhere in the EU without having to look at our watches, and savings deposits of up to 100,000 euros are equally secure throughout the entire EU.
Issues that affect us on a daily basis are the subject of lively deliberations in the European Parliament – just a few examples of these issues include data protection, climate policy, our strategy for dealing with refugees and measures to ensure social cohesion.
So when we vote in the European elections, we’re not just voting onsome abstract notion of Europe. Rather, our votes will have an impact on specific policy decisions.
That isn’t always easy.
We have euro coins in our hand every day. Isn’t it crucial for us to be able to have confidence in the stability of their value?
We regularly buy food from other European countries at our local shops. Don’t we expect the same consumer protection standards to apply in those countries as in ours?
The crisis brought problems to light in certain EU member states. These problems were largely caused by the accelerating forces of globalisation, but they were blamed to a great extent on our common currency.
in several countries, public support for national politicians and institutions has suffered an even greater decline than in the EU.
Eurosceptics are trying to play with people’s fears.
But their seemingly simple solutions fail to do justice to people’s concerns.
We have to take steps to ensure that the European Union is once again viewed as a solution to rather than the cause of problems.
You can have an impact only if you get involved.
The crisis has caused damage to the European Union’s social structures.
Making comments from the sidelines does not help.
Here’s one example of what I mean:
This is something you can see in our joint European efforts to boost stability and the development of democratic structures in the countries and societies neighbouring the EU.
Does this mean the end of Germany’s long-standing emphasis on military restraint?
Germany will continue to exercise restraint.
It’s essential to engage in close cooperation with our partners and to develop creative, intelligent strategies for deploying our resources even more effectively.
Institutions for the peaceful balancing of interests – like the European Union and the United Nations – didn’t exist at the beginning of the 20th century.
EU Strategy for Security and Development in the Sahel
The core aspect is an integrated approach comprising security and development.
Ukraine conflict: Steinmeier meets Visegrad Group
On 13 March, the German Foreign Minister visited Budapest.
There he met his counterparts from the Visegrad Group to discuss the crisis in Ukraine.
On 13 March, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier attended a meeting of the Visegrad Group.
The Group is a loose formation made up of the four Eastern European countries Hungary, Poland, the Czech Republic and Slovakia.
Together with his opposite numbers, the German Foreign Minister discussed the current crisis in Ukraine.
At this critical time, the Europeans want to work together even more closely.
This was reaffirmed by the Ministers at the subsequent joint press conference.
Steinmeier went on to say that the situation was extremely dangerous.
The Minister went on to say that help and support for Ukraine remained essential.
And not for a European neighbourhood which still has to examine, still has to explore, with which structures it can work sufficiently reliably in Ukraine to ensure that the assistance granted really does improve people’s situation.
At the same time, Steinmeier continued, thinking of the “contemporaneity” of history sent “shivers down one’s spine”.
According to the Foreign Minister, the outbreak of the First World War showed what happens “if dialogue is not sought out”.
Critics would object, the Foreign Minister continued, saying that politicians would be better off staying alert and working on the current crisis in Crimea rather than being sidelined by acts of remembrance.
In seeking to resolve the situation, it was important not to go down “dead ends” but to search for “ways out”, according to the German Foreign Minister.
crisis makes us remember
Clark, Sturm and Krumeich on the panel
the attack on the Austrian heir to the throne had involved a motorcade and suicide attacker, elements which we are fully familiar with in international politics today.
The reactions to this, such as the gathering of troops and the harshening of rhetoric reminded us of the current crisis in Crimea and served as a reminder of how quickly the “elemental forces of the events” could snowball in reality.
On the other hand, political decision making of the time was significantly less transparent than it is now.
“testing” the willingness to go to war
The German historian Gerd Krumeich attributed the German audience’s enthusiasm towards Clark’s work “The Sleepwalkers” to the fact that the historian argued that the imperialism and nationalism of the Germans had been no worse than that of the other great powers.
“Everyone was involved in the escalation in rhetoric and the arms race, but Germany lit the fuse which led to the explosion.”
Peter Sturm of the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung moderated the event.
Although the event overran, the audience gave enthusiastic applause, yet another sign of how relevant the debate over the triggers of the First World War remains in 2014.
It was thus vital for dialogue between Russia and the West not to be severed.
in Steinmeier’s view, addressing the First World War could provide many conclusions which are relevant to the current situation.
EU training mission: EUTM Mali
The July 1914 Crisis – Sleepwalking Diplomats?
On Friday (14 March), Foreign Minister Steinmeier hosted a debate on the July 1914 Crisis in the German Historical Museum, with historians Christopher Clark and Gerd Krumeich.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier, in collaboration with Alexander Koch, the President of the German Historical Museum Foundation, opened a debate on Friday (14 March) on the July 1914 Crisis.
In the Schlüterhof of the German Historical Museum the historians Christopher Clark and Gerd Krumeich discussed how the escalation in the July Crisis in 1914 came about and what lessons relevant to the current crisis in Crimea we can learn from it.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier opened the panel discussion
In his opening speech, Foreign Minister Steinmeier expressed his pleasure at how many people had attended the event in the Schlüterhof of the German Historical Museum.
100 years after the First World War, the crisis in Crimea had once again raised the questions of “war and peace”, of “unity or division of the continent” in Europe.
Lessons from the July Crisis
Yet the two were not mutually exclusive –
The July 1914 Crisis is a clear example of what happens when diplomacy fails.
Therefore, with regard to Ukraine we will impose sanctions in stages, so that we will constantly be able to react to the latest developments and to ensure it is always possible to “pull back from” conflict – that is another lesson learnt from the July 1914 Crisis.
In his speech, the historian Christopher Clark noted the amazing “modernity” of the July Crisis –
Today, heads of government were more capable of critical self-reflection and had a much broader range of communication channels open between each other.
Krumeich:
Over 500 people attended the event in the Schlüterhof at the German Historical Museum
In the end however, Germany and Austria-Hungary’s testing of Russia’s willingness to go to war triggered the July Crisis – this is how “German diplomacy failed”.
In the discussion which followed, Clark and Krumeich engaged in a well-informed debate over the importance of blame for the war, the role played by society and the political and military culture of the early years of the twentieth century.
The series is entitled “1914/2014 – Of the Failure of and the Need for Diplomacy”.
In a series of six discussions German and international historians and policy-makers will systematically explore how and why diplomacy failed on the eve of World War I and why responsible foreign policy is so important.
A visit to the Hungarian Foreign Ministry in Budapest.
O-TON: of course, there are memories of Budapest 1956, Prague 1968 and Gdansk 1981.
People in this part of the European Union still remember all of that and are therefore watching events with concern, some even with a sense of imminent threat.
However, it would not be possible to split the Europeans.
With regard to further EU sanctions, they would hope until the last minute that Russia would change course.
O-TON: Should, however, events develop in such a way that we are forced to take measures, then we will have to, and indeed we will, make a decision.
Clear in the message we want to send and united in purpose.
O-TON: It’s not easy in the current situation. Not for an interim government which has just taken up office.
After stopping off at the Hungarian Parliament, Steinmeier left Budapest to fly back to Berlin in the evening.
These scars remind us that the peaceful Europe in which we now live must not be taken for granted.
Steinmeier pointed out the special situation of his partners in Eastern Europe – for,
Yes, there are many small, practical examples that demonstrate how we in Europe are moving step by step towards a culture of shared remembrance.
The focus was on the concern regarding the referendum in the Ukrainian peninsula Crimea.
Not only at Douaumont, but in countless battlefields of the past, the dead lie together: often in mass graves, sometimes separated only by hedges, and sometimes separated from each other by only a few kilometres.
They admonish us to keep the memories of wartime horrors alive, both today and in future generations.
Germany contributes 12.3 million US dollars per year, making it one of the biggest bilateral donors of humanitarian assistance for Mali.
However, we know that
Food aid via the World Food Programme, Deutsche Welthungerhilfe as well as smaller NGOs such as ADRA Adventist Development and Relief Agency (distribution of seed).
we would repeat our guilt if we were to keep silent about or relativise, let alone deny, what the generation of our grandparents and great-grandparents did to other human beings and countries.
The Federal Foreign Office is thus assisting the new Ministry for Reconciliation and Development of the North by providing advisory services and equipment for local reconciliation meetings in every community in northern Mali.
Shared commemoration, remembrance and reconciliation are qualities that shape German foreign policy.
It has a total volume of around 606 million euros (country programmes, stability instrument and the 10th European Development Fund)
First and foremost, existing national programmes should be further developed by, for example, providing partial funding or seconding experts to provide assistance.
The aims of the strategy are:
Crucial here is the ongoing cooperation with the African Union and the regional organisation ECOWAS.
We are therefore very grateful to our European partners and friends that many commemorative events all across Europe will be organised jointly.
The aims are to be reached through four fields of action:
To us, their willingness to do so is a visible sign of reconciliation.
One of the purposes of the UN Integrated Strategy for the Sahel of 2013 is to fund major infrastructure projects in the region with a newly created donor platform.
Until the end of January, the former Italian Prime Minister Romano Prodi was the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel.
His tasks were taken over by Saïd Djinnit, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of UNOWA (seat: Dakar).
In 2014-2015, Mali is chairing a platform intended to coordinate the various international Sahel strategies (also those of the AU, ECOWAS and the World Bank).
The mandate is to be extended for two years until 2016.
The EU is also planning to set up a civilian CSDP mission.
Further topics will be the talks with Iran about its nuclear programme, the Middle East peace process and the situation in Syria.
Reactions to the referendum
The “annexation” of the Ukrainian peninsula to Russian territory was a breach of international law.
Therefore the European Foreign Ministers will respond here and now.
In conclusion, Steinmeier urged that the monitoring mission be sent now and not just next week or the week after when it may already be too late.
Avoiding a division of Europe
the situation in Crimea must not lead to a new division of Europe, and especially not to a military confrontation between Ukrainian and Russian forces.
The internal security sector is to be strengthened by training and advising the police, gendarmerie and national guard.
The maximum number of German troops participating in EUTM Mali at any one time was increased from 180 to 250 soldiers in the Bundestag mandate of 20 February 2014.
It is due to take place on 16 March... and afterwards there could be moves to push ahead with the integration of the Crimea into Russian territory.
All the possibilities and options offered by foreign policy should be used so that a way can still be found out of the crisis.
Reconciliation requires effort and strength.
Furthermore, Germany has provided the UN mission MINUSMA with two Transall transport aircraft, senior officers as well as police officers – a total of 80 persons.
“Truth is the sister of reconciliation.”
With their assistance, most major towns in the north, previously controlled by Islamist groups, have now been liberated.
Mali’s problems are partly also the problems of its neighbouring countries: borders which are difficult to control, drug, arms and human trafficking, organised crime, high youth unemployment as well as susceptibility to food shortages due to climate change.
The European Union therefore drew up a Strategy for Security and Development in the Sahel back in 2011.
It mainly focuses on Mali, Mauritania and the Niger, and since recently also on Chad and Burkina Faso.
improving political stability, security and good governance as well as creating conditions conducive to sustainable development.
1. development, good governance and internal conflict settlement; 2. political and diplomatic approaches; 3. security and the rule of law; 4. measures to prevent and combat extremism and radicalisation.
The European Union is also helping to enable Mali to once more guarantee security throughout the country on its own.
EUTM Mali, the training mission which EU Foreign Ministers had agreed on at their council in Brussels on 18 February, officially began operations on 2 April 2013.
German assistance in Mali focuses on two areas:
The Commission is a non-profit organisation that tends the graves of over 2.5 million people who were killed during the First and Second World Wars, in over 830 cemeteries and 45 countries around the world.
Improvement in the returnee situation in northern Mali, usually via NGOs (ADRA, Help e.V., Plan International, Caritas Germany) with a view to bringing about improvements in the water supply/hygiene/sanitation as well as non-food items, travel assistance, training in income generation, food security.
On 20 December 2012, the Council adopted Resolution 2085 (2012) to sanction AFISMA and authorise ECOWAS to re-establish Mali’s territorial integrity.
International support for Mali is currently being mobilised at various different levels.
The German War Graves Commission carries out its work under the motto, “reconciliation transcending the graves”.
This is a very special way of depicting the uniting effect of shared remembrance.
Unlike in most countries, the Commission tends war graves in its capacity as a registered association, not as a government authority.
Its efforts deserve recognition and respect.
The Federal Foreign Office engages in close and trusting cooperation with the Commission and supports its work.
This is because it is essential to look not only at the past but also towards the future.
With all of the current problems confronting the EU in our globalised world, the narrative of peace is neither outmoded nor irrelevant.
This is something that becomes even more understandable when we shift perspectives.
That is one reason why people on the Maidan risked their lives waving the European flag.
Yes, the values that Europe stands for continue to exert attraction and spawn hope.
They make us strong, but they also give us special responsibility.
We must not shy away from this responsibility;
rather, we must work to protect and defend the European model of values.
The tending of war graves makes an outstanding contribution to these efforts,
by admonishing us to remember the past and by reminding us of our shared responsibility for the future.
EU Foreign Affairs Council –
Steinmeier calls for monitoring mission in Ukraine The referendum on Crimea joining Russia is on the agenda at the consultations of the 28 EU Foreign Ministers in Brussels today.
Steinmeier calls for monitoring mission in Ukraine
At the consultations of the 28 EU Foreign Ministers in Brussels today (17 March), the referendum on Crimea joining Russia is at the top of the agenda.
On Monday morning, before the EU Foreign Affairs Council started, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier stressed that yesterday’s referendum on Crimea joining Russia had created circumstances which made it impossible for Europe to simply return to business as usual.
Their response will be such that it will be clearly understood in Russia on the one hand, whilst on the other leaving open ways and options to prevent a further escalation which could lead to a division of Europe.
Steinmeier calls for an OSCE monitoring mission
To this end, an OSCE monitoring mission needed to be deployed immediately, said the Foreign Minister, continuing:
In my opinion, we need the immediate and rapid deployment of an OSCE monitoring mission, which will be active primarily in eastern and southern Ukraine in order to closely monitor whether Russia continues its activities outside of Crimea and is destabilising Ukraine.
In many conference calls, Russia had claimed that it had “no ambition” to “extend its activities to eastern or southern Ukraine”, the Foreign Minister went on.
Meeting of EU Foreign Ministers
Speaking to the daily news programme Tagesthemen the evening before, Steinmeier had already stressed that one must not sit back “depressed or resigned” in the face of the referendum –
Following yesterday’s referendum on Ukraine’s Crimean peninsula, the EU Foreign Affairs Council discussed sanctions against Russia today.
Further topics to be discussed by the EU Foreign Ministers include the talks with Iran about its nuclear programme, the Middle East peace process and the situation in Syria.
In August 1943, in the midst of the worst horrors of the Second World War, Willy Brandt wrote a newspaper article from his exile in Norway in which he stated:
Someday the Europe where Europeans can live must become a reality.”
That is because this year we are commemorating two particularly momentous and devastating events in our continent’s turbulent history.
In countless locations throughout Europe, the horrible wartime atrocities of the 20th century left behind deep wounds and scars.
For example, at the Douaumont memorial in France, near the Verdun front, the name of a German soldier was recently inscribed on a memorial plaque for the first time.
At the same time, reconciliation also sows the seeds for confidence in the future.
Where else, if not at a mass grave, can one even begin to comprehend the unimaginable suffering of war?
Where else, if not at the grave of a young soldier, do abstract numbers of victims give way to an awareness of the deeply touching individual fates of the millions of soldiers and civilians who lost their lives during the two world wars?
After the tragedies our continent has seen, this is something that certainly cannot be taken for granted.
Contrary to all the pessimistic talk about the EU, reconciled Europe resonates powerfully and serves as a model for other world regions.
We Germans in particular bear a particular responsibility, which we acknowledge – regardless of the fact that today’s generation is not directly responsible for the atrocities of the past.
And, as Federal President Gauck recently stated so memorably in the Greek village of Lingiades as he asked forgiveness for the Wehrmacht’s horrible atrocities:
The Commission’s youth work – which carries forward the idea of reconciliation in a particularly important way – deserves special praise.
That’s probably another reason why the EU was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2012.
Following the onset of political upheavals in the Arab world in 2011, the EU decided to intensify its cooperation with this region and to pursue more differentiated policies with the individual countries.
Accordingly, closer relations with the EU are to be offered especially to those partners that make progress towards democracy and the rule of law.
The establishment of the German-Italian Commission of Historians by the two Governments was an important first step.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and his Italian counterpart Federica Mogherini are flying together this afternoon (17 March) from the EU Foreign Affairs Council consultations in Brussels to Berlin to take part in the German-Italian intergovernmental consultations.
Speech by Minister of State Michael Roth to open the exhibition “Remembering for the Future”, on 10 March 2014 in the Atrium of the Federal Foreign Office
“The day will come when hatred, which seems unavoidable in war, will be overcome.
In the hour of humanity’s greatest catastrophe, Willy Brandt possessed the gift of looking ahead – full of hope and confidence – to a better future.
“Remembering for the Future”: this is the title of the exhibition we are opening today here in the Atrium of the Federal Foreign Office, a title that could certainly also serve as the leitmotif for the year 2014.
One hundred years ago, gunshots in Sarajevo launched the First World War. And 75 years ago, Germany’s invasion of Poland set in motion the cataclysm of the Second World War.
This year’s commemorative dates provide us Europeans with the opportunity to foster greater mutual understanding and to affirm the various methods we have developed to come to terms with the past.
The tireless efforts of the German War Graves Commission also give testament to how the memory of 20th century war victims is being kept alive, genuinely and with respect.
Projects involving young people from different countries are something that I and the entire Federal Foreign Office care about deeply.
That’s very likely what the jury in Oslo wanted to admonish us to remember.
On behalf of the Federal Government, I would like to express my heartfelt thanks to everyone involved with the German War Graves Commission.
I am pleased to welcome you here at the Federal Foreign Office, and I look forward to finding out more about the Commission’s work.
The exhibition is now officially open.
He was accompanied by several Italian Ministers on his first visit to Berlin since taking up office.
The German-Italian Commission of Historians set up by Federal Minister Steinmeier and his then Italian counterpart Frattini in 2008 to “jointly examine German–Italian wartime history, in particular with regard to Italian military internees, as a contribution to creating a common culture of remembrance”, presented its final report in December 2012.
The report contains recommendations to the two Governments on the creation of a shared culture of remembrance between Germany and Italy.
The accession of central and eastern European countries to the Union raised the question of how the EU could contribute to democracy, stability and growth in neighbouring countries.
Jointly confronting wartime history
By seeking to confront wartime history, the two countries’ Foreign Ministers want to play their part in achieving this goal.
By seeking to jointly confront wartime history, the two countries’ Foreign Ministers want to play their part in achieving this goal.
The ENP aims first and foremost to foster reform processes and offers no direct prospect of accession to the EU.
Its chief objectives are to contribute to the realisation of shared values (especially democracy, human rights, the rule of law and good governance) and to promote economic development.
According to Steinmeier this shared past was “the most difficult chapter in the long history of Germany and Italy”.
Laying the foundations for a shared culture of remembrance
They are comprised of an agenda setting out political and economic reforms covering a period of three to five years.
He went on to say that, in the coming years, the two countries wanted to continue their cooperation on implementing the Commission’s central recommendations in a spirit of trust.
One million euros are earmarked in the Federal Foreign Office budget for the German-Italian Future Fund in the draft federal budget for 2014.
The implementation of the recommendations of the German-Italian Commission of Historians will be one of the main issues discussed in the bilateral talks between Frank-Walter Steinmeier and Federica Mogherini during the intergovernmental consultations.
In the coming years, we want to continue our cooperation on implementing the Commission’s central recommendations in a spirit of trust.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier at the intergovernmental consultations with Italy: We have to continue coming to grips with our shared wartime history
Coming to grips with our shared wartime past, this most difficult chapter in the long history of Germany and Italy, is of crucial importance to both of us.
The report contains recommendations to the two Governments on the creation of a shared culture of remembrance between Germany and Italy.
Despite various challenges, the UfM plays a key role as a forum for regional cooperation that includes Israel and Turkey.
In line with these recommendations, the Federal Foreign Office is funding remembrance projects in close coordination with the Italian Foreign Ministry relating to events from 1943 to 1945, as well as further research work in both countries.
EU Foreign Ministers adopt measures against Russia
The EU members states agreed on targeted sanctions against high-level representatives of Russia and Crimea.
In addition to this, Foreign Minister Steinmeier called for the deployment of an OSCE monitoring mission to southern and eastern Ukraine in order to observe Russian activity outside of Crimea.
It had not been one of the easiest Foreign Affairs Councils that he had ever attended, acknowledged Frank-Walter Steinmeier shortly before departing from Brussels.
The German Foreign Minister stated that in the end, it had been a day of clear messages – to Russia on the one hand and on the other to our eastern European partners, in the form of a sign of solidarity.
A day of clear messages
As expected, the EU Foreign Ministers agreed to impose sanctions in the form of travel restrictions and asset freezes against a series of people who, according to Steinmeier, were responsible for the escalation of the crisis.
The list will include people who are responsible for the escalation of the crisis in Crimea in a wide variety of different ways.
This includes eight high-level politicians from Crimea itself, ten people from Russia, including members of the Duma and members of the Council of the Federation, as well as three members of the military, including the Commander of Russia’s Black Sea fleet.
Hopes for a monitoring mission to be deployed soon
Steinmeier and his counterparts Asselborn from Luxembourg and Tuomioja from Finland
Steinmeier also voiced the hope that agreement would soon be reached to send an OSCE monitoring mission to Ukraine.
This mission would not only be symbolic, its “presence should be strong and visible, at least in the towns”.
Preventing a further escalation
As expected, following the referendum on the Ukraine’s Crimean peninsula the EU Foreign Ministers have adopted sanctions against Russia in the form of travel restrictions and asset freezes.
In the evening, Foreign Minister Steinmeier travelled back to Berlin together with his Italian counterpart Federica Mogherini in order to take part in the German-Italian intergovernmental consultations.
Council conclusions on Ukraine PDF | 82 KB
Partnership for democracy and prosperity with the Southern Mediterranean
Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement:
Consolidating the partnership between our two countries, we are determined to also jointly examine the difficult times in our history.
The funding is to be consolidated in the current legislative term.
At the consultations of the 28 EU Foreign Ministers in Brussels, the EU’s response to the referendum in Crimea, which violates international law, was on the agenda.
At the consultations of the 28 EU Foreign Ministers in Brussels today (17 March), the referendum on Crimea joining Russia was at the top of the agenda.
Nonetheless, the discussion had been held in a “congenial, responsible” atmosphere and the 28 member states had remained closely aligned in their assessment, stance and decisions regarding the crisis in Crimea.
The Foreign Minister went on to say that in many conference calls, Russia had claimed that it had “no ambition” to “extend its activities to eastern or southern Ukraine”.
Russia now had the opportunity to prove this by “removing the obstacles which stand in the way of an OSCE monitoring mission”.
On Monday morning, before the EU Foreign Affairs Council started, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier had already stressed that yesterday’s referendum on Crimea joining Russia had created circumstances which made it impossible for Europe to simply return to business as usual.
Further topics discussed by the EU Foreign Ministers included the talks with Iran about its nuclear programme, the Middle East peace process and the situation in Syria and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mobility and trade
Large numbers of migrants come from or transit through the countries of North Africa.
Successful dialogues on “migration, mobility and security” have been conducted with Tunisia and Morocco.
The aim of the German-Italian intergovernmental consultations is the enhancement of bilateral relations.
As Steinmeier explained before the start of the meeting, coming to grips with their shared wartime past was “of crucial importance to both countries”.
The funding is to be consolidated in the course of the current legislative term.
One of the main objectives of such dialogues is to establish a mobility partnership that focuses on four priorities:
strengthening legal migration, combating irregular migration, expanding refugee protection and intensifying the links between migration and development.
Negotiations to set up a mobility partnership with Tunisia have been successfully concluded.
The German Foreign Minister invited Mogherini to join him on his flight back to Berlin on the German Government aircraft after the EU Foreign Affairs Council in Brussels.
The aim of the 30th German-Italian intergovernmental consultations on 17 March is further enhancing the close relations between Berlin and Rome.
Ongoing efforts to advance cooperation
The German-Italian intergovernmental consultations in Berlin
Before the start of the intergovernmental consultations in Berlin, Federal Chancellor Angela Merkel welcomed Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi with military honours.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier and his Italian counterpart, Federica Mogherini, even travelled to the intergovernmental consultations together.
Close German-Italian dialogue
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and his Italian colleague used their joint trip to Berlin for an in-depth discussion on world affairs.
The main focus of their talks was the crisis in the Crimea. Apart from that, implementing the recommendations of the German-Italian Commission of Historians was a main topic of their conversation.
“The establishment of the German-Italian Commission of Historians by the two Governments was an important first step,” Steinmeier said.
We reaffirm our goal to lay the foundations for a shared culture of remembrance between Germany and Italy.
Steinmeier and Mogherini during the Libya conference in Rome (6 March)
The German-Italian Commission of Historians set up by Federal Minister Steinmeier and his then Italian counterpart Frattini in 2008 presented its final report in December 2012.
In line with these recommendations, the Federal Foreign Office is funding remembrance projects in close coordination with the Italian Foreign Ministry relating to events from 1943 to 1945, as well as further research work in both countries.
This includes a permanent exhibition on the fate of Italian military internees at the memorial for National Socialist forced labour in the Niederschöneweide district of Berlin, a book of commemoration for the victims of military internment, an “atlas of violence” on the crimes of the SS and Wehrmacht in Italy as well as other remembrance projects initiated by victims’ associations and communities in Italy.
One million euros are earmarked in the Federal Foreign Office budget for the German-Italian Future Fund in the draft federal budget for 2014.
The adoption of the ENP coincided with the EU’s eastward enlargement in 2004.
These action plans are the ENP’s primary operative instrument.
It further develops the EU’s existing Mediterranean policy
After the onset of the Arab Spring in 2011, the EU undertook a review of the European Neighbourhood Policy’s instruments and its cooperation with southern neighbours in particular.
The issues of mobility and migration are key priorities in the EU’s cooperation with its southern neighbours.
The EU’s southern neighbourhood is a dynamic region with major challenges.
Their talks will focus on current international efforts to resolve the Middle East conflict and Germany's support for the establishment of state structures in the Palestinian territories.
Participants on the Palestinian side will be Prime Minister Hamdallah, Foreign Minister Malki, Interior Minister Abu Ali, Education Minister Abu Zuhri, Planning Affairs Minister Abu Ramdan and Deputy Economic Affairs Minister Amro.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier to meet Prime Minister Hamdallah – The German-Palestinian Steering Committee to convene at the Federal Foreign Office
On Wednesday, 19 March, Foreign Minister Steinmeier will meet Rami Hamdallah, Prime Minister of the Palestinian Authority, at the Federal Foreign Office.
The talks will kick off the 3rd meeting of the German-Palestinian Steering Committee, which has served as the framework for regular intergovernmental consultations since 2010.
The German Government will be represented by Federal Ministers Wanka and Müller as well as by civil servants from the Interior, Economics and Research Ministries and the Federal Chancellery.
The European Commission publishes annual progress reports evaluating the implementation of the action plans.
The EU member states support this new orientation in the EU’s Neighbourhood Policy and decided in June 2011 to strengthen the linkage between progress on reforms and financial support (the “more for more” principle).
EU support for its southern neighbourhood
The countries of North Africa and the Eastern Mediterranean are a priority area for EU external relations.
Catherine Ashton with Mokhtar Trifi, President of the Tunisian Human Rights League (February 2011)
European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP)
The EU’s response was to create the ENP, which pools EU programmes in the areas of finance, trade and mobility.
The ENP is geared towards the EU’s eastern and southern neighbours. The “Eastern Partnership” encompasses Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine, and the “Southern Neighbourhood” is comprised of Algeria, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, the Palestinian territories, Syria and Tunisia.
The UfM encompasses a total of 43 countries, including all EU member states, the countries bordering the Mediterranean Sea (except Libya), Jordan and Mauritania.
and aims to promote economic integration and sector-specific cooperation.
From 2007 to 2013, the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument (ENPI) served as the main source of financial support under the ENP.
The ENPI has been replaced by the European Neighbourhood Instrument (ENI) for the period from 2014 to 2020.
For the 2014–2020 period (i.e., the current multiannual financial framework) € 15.4 bn euros have been allocated to the ENP. Two-thirds of this sum are expected to be targeted towards the Southern Neighbourhood.
The EU Special Representative Bernardino León is one of the main coordinators of the EU’s activities in the Southern Mediterranean.
A mobility partnership with Morocco was established in June 2013 and is currently in the implementation stage.
In addition to existing trade liberalisation on the basis of Association Agreements, the EU is poised to offer Egypt, Tunisia, Morocco and Jordan greater access to the EU internal market within the framework of Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreements.
The EU is engaged in a continuous process of fine-tuning its neighbourhood policy, in order to offer attractive programmes that aim to strengthen its neighbours’ bonds to the EU and its values.
Development cooperation with Africa
During the past decades, many of these states have developed into stable democracies and some have achieved impressive economic growth.
However, the gap between rich and poor is continuing to widen and many peace processes are still fragile.
Modern development cooperation with Africa therefore remains vital.
Bild: Market in Dire Dawa in eastern Ethiopia
More than one third of the world’s poorest people thus live there.
One in four Africans has been affected by a state crisis or an armed conflict.
More than 90 per cent of all those around the world infected with the AIDS virus live in sub-Saharan Africa.
What is more, debt, capital flight and unfair rules in international trade have hampered social and economic development.
Promoting opportunities for Africa
The aim of Germany’s policy is to make use of the new political momentum which many African countries are experiencing today.
The German Government’s Africa Strategy provides concrete answers to this; it places development cooperation in the broader context of a policy geared to equal partnership.
There is close coordination within the international donor community,
while recipient countries closely analyse their own needs.
African ownership is the key:
the growing international consensus on development goals and national poverty reduction strategies is encouraging.
Notable progress has been made in individual spheres.
For example, school enrolment levels in southern Africa rose by 17 per cent between 2000 and 2011.
Debt relief and health initiatives
Sub-Saharan Africa profits more than any other region in the world from the debt initiatives HIPC (Highly Indebted Poor Countries) and MDRI (Multinational Debt Relief Initiative).
Likewise, the Global Fund to Fight HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, initiated by the then UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan in 2001, greatly benefits Africa.
The Joint Africa-EU Strategy adopted at the EU-Africa Summit in Lisbon on 13 December 2007 is a framework for political action by the European Union and the German Government vis-à-vis Africa.
Within the scope of the following eight specific partnerships, the Strategy is implemented together with various partners – for instance, the private sector, civil society, the parliaments: peace and security, democratic governance and human rights, trade, regional integration and infrastructure; Millennium Development Goals; energy, climate change; migration, mobility and employment; science, information society and space.
Millennium Development Goals
Bild: At school
In September 2000, the Heads of State and Government of 189 countries came to New York for the Millennium Summit.
The Summit adopted the Millennium Declaration.
Eight international development goals were derived from it: the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
The international community undertook to reach the following MDGs by 2015:
On 17 March Minister of State Roth met his French and Polish counterparts to discuss current European Council and European policy issues.
Halve poverty and hunger
Achieve universal primary education for boys and girls
Minister of State Roth meets Weimar Triangle colleagues
Promote gender equality and empower women
Reduce child mortality
Improve maternal health
Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other infections diseases
Ensure environmental sustainability
Develop a global partnership for development
To achieve these objectives, diverse targets were set: the most important concern the further development of an open, rules-based, predictable and non-discriminatory trade and financial system and the commitment to good governance.
Discussions also focused on the situation in Ukraine.
Ministers of State for European Affairs Serafin, Repentin and Roth
In the run-up to the meeting, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier had published a joint opinion piece with Dutch Foreign Minister Frans Timmermans, in which the two ministers urged the European Union to undertake reforms.
Clearing cluster munitions
The Federal Foreign Office has supported Macedonia in this endeavour.
Cluster munitions pose an insidious threat to people in many countries.
Because of the high dud rate of such munitions, civilian populations often continue to suffer even years after the end of military conflicts.
Many of the victims are children.
The three European affairs ministers last met in the Weimar Triangle constellation in Heilbronn in 2013 and in Warsaw in 2012.
In the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness, the African states and their international partners agreed in 2005 to better harmonise and coordinate joint efforts in the coming years.
Germany is thus intensely dedicated to humanitarian mine and ordnance clearance efforts around the world, and supports the Convention on Cluster Munitions which entered into force in 2010 and which bans this type of weapon.
Dismantling cluster munitions (file photo)
The importance of effective development cooperation was most recently reaffirmed within the scope of the High-Level Forum for Development Effectiveness held in Busan, Korea, in late 2011.
In order to ensure that cluster munitions still available around the world are no longer used, the Federal Foreign Office and its partners have continued to destroy cluster munitions in the countries affected.
In 2013, for example, the Federal Foreign Office provided 193,000 euros for the destruction of cluster munitions stockpiles in Georgia and Macedonia.
More Europe, not less
Germany is keen for Africa to resolve its problems by its own efforts and using its own capacities.
The African partners played a key role in the discussion in Busan.
They argue that much progress has already been made in key areas, but a lot of work remains to be done.
In their view, it is crucial to make the European Union more focused, to ensure the strength and efficiency of European institutions, and to enhance the legitimacy of European decision-making processes.
In Georgia, German support to the tune of 78,000 euros made it possible to complete a programme begun in 2011 to destroy a total of 1085 cluster bombs and 60 guided missiles from old Soviet stocks.
For Steinmeier and Timmermans, the objective is to ensure “a strong Europe with the right priorities”.
German development cooperation in sub-Saharan Africa
with the aim of reducing the risk of military violence in Georgia.
In the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the Federal Foreign Office is taking part in a large-scale project to destroy 988 cluster munition mortars and 1439 cluster munition disposable containers.
Germany takes international agreements as well as the commitments it has entered into very seriously. Therefore, in consultation with its African partners and other donors, it is focusing increasingly on certain cooperation priorities.
Just under 115,000 euros has been made available for the project from the Federal Foreign Office budget.
The Government of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia receives assistance in fulfilling its obligations under the Convention on Cluster Munitions.
For more information please visit the website of the Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development
Funding for development cooperation
In addition to stabilisation missions in the field of security policy, it is important that sufficient funding is made available for Germany’s long-term development cooperation with Africa.
Georgia, which has not yet signed the Convention, is being supported along the path towards becoming a State Party.
More than half of the development budget is to flow into development cooperation with Africa in 2014.
The Convention on Cluster Munitions prohibits the use, possession, production, import and export of all types of cluster munitions.
Germany was one of its initiators, and it entered into force on 1 August 2010.
In addition, there are the German contributions to global measures, as well as the funding which goes to Africa through the European Union, the United Nations (including UN peace missions) and via measures taken by international financial institutions.
Steinmeier added:
We will have more Europe when European institutions can focus on the tasks that are truly important.
That is why the subsidiary principle is of great significance.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier issuing his press statement.
At left:
Roth went on to say:
Injecting new life into the union of shared values
German development policy is formulated by the Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development and implemented by organisations such as KfW and GIZ.
With regard to the elections for the European Parliament in May, the German Minister of State for Europe underscored the significance of the basic values initiative:
It is first and foremost a union of shared values.
It is the only region in the world in which the number of people living in extreme poverty has continued to rise steadily, namely from 290 million in 1990 to 414 million in 2010.
Smart decisions on Ukraine
Vitality and momentum
The Federal Foreign Office is supporting the project for crisis prevention in the Caucasus.
On Monday (17 March) Minister of State Michael Roth met French Minister Delegate for European Affairs Thierry Repentin and Polish Secretary of State for European Affairs Piotr Serafin.
Their talks focused primarily on current European Council affairs in the areas of climate, energy and industry as well as topical European policy issues.
After the meeting Minister of State Roth emphasised the vitality and momentum of the Weimar Triangle.
He said that in the joint mediation attempt in Ukraine it had “been instrumental in helping the EU to speak with one voice in this dramatic situation”.
He stressed that this united front benefited not only France, Germany and Poland, but also the EU as a whole.
Every crisis contains a seed of hope.
As Europeans we now have the chance to improve our position, for only by working together can we tackle the foreign and security policy challenges facing us.
The three European affairs ministers agreed to meet more regularly to give impetus and direction to this important issue on the European policy agenda.
Destruction of napalm powder and white phosphorus in Serbia
Large quantities of out-of-date surplus ammunition are still in storage in Serbia.
The storage conditions for napalm and white phosphorus often don’t comply with the required standards, thus posing an environmental and security risk for Serbia and its neighbours.
Serbia itself has neither the funding nor, to some extent, the technology to dispose of this highly toxic munitions in a proper, environmentally safe way within a reasonable period.
Since 2012, Germany has provided up to 100,000 euros a year from the Federal Foreign Office budget towards an initiative of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) to assist the Serbian Government in destroying napalm powder as well as munitions containing white phosphorus, which is extremely dangerous.
Germany’s contribution has already made it possible to destroy 110 tonnes of napalm powder.
stating that progress in this matter would not constitute a “political solution” to the conflict but would allow “de-escalation efforts” finally to begin.
The use of napalm as incendiary ammunition is prohibited under the UN Weapons Convention (CCW), Protocol III.
Even a small splash of burning napalm causes severe skin burns which are extremely hard to heal.
White phosphorus and its fumes are highly toxic; even small quantities coming into contact with the skin cause injuries which do not heal easily.
Part of a long-term project
The measure being funded by Germany is part of the Capacity Development Programme for Conventional Ammunition Stockpile Management for the Republic of Serbia (CASM).
Jointly writing down and discussing prejudices against the public and private sectors as well as civil society is only one element of the training that the 18 participants from the Caucasus took part in during the Social Leader Forum in Berlin from 13 to 15 March.
Macedonia is a State Party to the Convention on Cluster Munitions and has undertaken to destroy completely its cluster munitions stockpiles.
Georgia has not yet signed the Convention on Cluster Munitions, but has said it is willing to destroy some of its cluster munitions stockpiles with financial assistance from the Federal Foreign Office.
This project was carried out by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
More on the worldwide ban on cluster munitions
With a view towards the upcoming European Council on Thursday and Friday, Steinmeier stated that the situation in Ukraine will be at the top of the agenda when the EU heads of state and government meet for talks.
And second, that we have chosen these measures in a way that makes it possible to return to a political process.”
Participants from Azerbaijan, Georgia, Romania and Russia
This is especially important in the Caucasus.
This is about Europe’s political future
At a brief press conference just prior to the General Affairs Council meeting in Brussels, Steinmeier emphasised on Tuesday morning that, when it comes to the political future of the European Union, Germany’s aim is to achieve “more Europe, not less”.
Steinmeier also emphasised that the Ukraine crisis has shown clearly that the European Union is concerned not only with economic and monetary issues, but also with issues involving “external security and the rule of law at home”.
In Steinmeier’s words, “We must safeguard the European Union’s shared foundation of values.”
So far there have hardly been any transregional initiatives for the prevention of crises.
This is set to change with the project “Joint Civic Education” which was launched by the German organisation MitOst in 2010.
Growing need for humanitarian assistance
where she met with Minister of State Maria Böhmer and the Federal Government’s Commissioner for Human Rights Policy, Christoph Strässer.
The talks focused on the humanitarian emergencies in Syria and its neighbouring countries, in South Sudan and in the Central African Republic.
Preparations for the World Humanitarian Summit under way
A further topic of discussion was the further development of the international system for providing humanitarian assistance.
During her visit to the Federal Foreign Office the Emergency Relief Coordinator also spoke about the ever growing need for humanitarian assistance.
The country’s efforts made it possible to continue to provide people affected with rapid assistance geared to their needs.
The Federal Foreign Office bears the chief responsibility for the German Government’s humanitarian aid abroad.
It funds emergency humanitarian assistance as well as transitional and food aid, in particular for refugees and internally displaced persons.
In 2013, the Federal Foreign Office spent over 358 million euros on responding to humanitarian crises around the world.
The priorities for this spending were the humanitarian emergency in Syria and its neighbouring countries, the Central African Republic and South Sudan.
The reform of the European Union topped the agenda of the EU Foreign Ministers meeting in the General Affairs Council.
On Tuesday (18 March) in Brussels, the reform of the European Union topped the agenda of deliberations among the EU’s 28 Foreign Ministers.
Austrian Foreign Minister Sebastian Kurz
In this connection, he expressed his appreciation that the European Commission and the Greek Council Presidency have put together proposals in this area.
Commenting on the decision by EU Foreign Ministers to impose targeted sanctions on 21 key figures from Russia and Crimea in response to the Crimean referendum, Steinmeier stated:
“The Foreign Affairs Council made a smart decision yesterday, sending a clear message to Russia that, first, we do not accept the secession of part of a country, because this is in violation of international law.
In addition, Foreign Minister Steinmeier renewed his call for the deployment of an OSCE mission to Ukraine,
The General Affairs Council at the level of EU Foreign Ministers serves to prepare the European Council of the heads of state and government which takes place on 20-21 March 2014.
Contributions to crisis prevention
Participants Arzu Geybullayeva and Teona Dalakishuili
Arzu Geybullayeva from Azerbaijan and Teona Dalakishuili from Georgia are happy to be able to take part in the programme in Berlin.
Teona Dalakishuili agrees, saying that some mutual prejudices run deep and thus much remains to be done.
The Federal Foreign Office has been supporting the project since 2011.
Learn more about the project Joint Civic Education
Where do we help? Projects for crisis prevention supported by the Federal Foreign Office
How can we overcome borders in our minds and on the map?
“However, as we all took part in previous programmes, the atmosphere here is very friendly”, she continues.
After the meeting with my Polish and French colleagues in the Weimar Triangle I am sure that the Council will send a positive message to inject new life into this union of shared values.
In the run-up to the European elections we must make especially clear that the EU is more than just a single market.
Their talks focused primarily on European Council issues such as the EU’s energy and climate change goals and the banking union.
The European elections and the situations in Ukraine and the Western Balkans were also on the agenda.
Last updated on 18 February 2014
European Affairs Minister Repentin invited his German and Polish colleagues to a working session at the prestigious Arab World Institute (Institut du Monde Arabe).
Teasertext: There are around 1 billion people currently living in 49 countries in sub-Saharan Africa.
There are around 1 billion people currently living in 49 countries in sub-Saharan Africa.
In sub-Saharan Africa, almost half of the population has to live on less than 1.25 dollars per day.
Post-2015 Agenda
Within the framework of the Post-2015 Agenda, the Millennium Goals not yet achieved are to be converged with the sustainable development agenda of the Rio+20 Process.
On 15/16 April 2014, the first ministerial meeting of the Global Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation founded in Busan will take place in Mexico to review the implementation of the commitments made in Busan, Accra and Paris.
More than 2000 development experts are currently working on behalf of the German Government in Africa.
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ)
On 18 March, UN Emergency Relief Coordinator Valerie Amos spoke to Minister of State Maria Böhmer and the Federal Government’s Commissioner for Human Rights Policy, Christoph Strässer, about the humanitarian emergencies in Syria, South Sudan and the Central African Republic.
UN Emergency Relief Coordinator visits the Federal Foreign Office
On 18 March, UN Emergency Relief Coordinator Valerie Amos visited the Federal Foreign Office
Minister of State Böhmer with UN Emergency Relief Coordinator Amos
The conflicts in the regions cited above have created great humanitarian challenges –
it is estimated that this year, 6.2 billion euros will be needed for around 19 million people in need.
Valerie Amos, the Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations (UN) and Head of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), thanked the Federal Government for the emergency assistance it has provided to Syria, the Central African Republic and South Sudan.
So far in 2014, Germany has pledged some 37 million euros in general as well as an additional 50 million euros specifically for the Syria crisis.
Amos informed Minister of State Böhmer and Commissioner for Human Rights Policy Strässer about the state of the preparations for the Externer Link, öffnet in neuem FensterWorld Humanitarian Summit 2016 in Istanbul.
The Federal Government is helping to prepare the event and will host a preparatory conference in Berlin next year.
UN Emergency Relief Coordinator Amos with Commissioner for Human Rights Policy Strässer
The number of natural catastrophes has doubled within the last 20 years; violent crises and conflicts have caused the global need for humanitarian aid to triple from 2006 to 2014, to approximately 11 billion euros.
Commenting on this, Ms Amos stressed Germany’s crucial role and responsibility as one of the most important humanitarian donors in the world.
They both work at local NGOs in their home countries and have met colleagues from abroad through the project “Joint Civic Education”.
“So far there haven’t been many programmes like this,” Arzu Geybullayeva says. In her opinion it is nice to see people from different countries and sectors come together.
The Social Leader Forum is supplemented by local programmes in Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Russia and Turkey which serve to prepare young people for work in civil-society organisations and for participation in decision-making processes in their communities.
Training courses like the one in Berlin cannot resolve the conflict in the Caucasus. However they can make a contribution by encouraging stakeholders from the private and public sectors as well as civil society to jointly search for solutions.
Cross-border cooperation in the Caucasus
At the Social Leader Forum in Berlin from 13 to 15 March, 18 participants from the Caucasus learned how to use a cross-border and cross-sectoral approach to tackle challenges facing society.
Breaking down prejudices: how civil society views the public sector
At the Social Leader Forum in Berlin from 13 to 15 March, 18 participants from Georgia, Azerbaijan, Russia and Turkey learned how to use a cross-border and cross-sectoral approach to tackle challenges facing society.
When asked what springs to mind when they think of the private sector, the representatives of civil society from the Caucasus mention terms such as innovative and efficient, but also corrupt, thinking short-term and only interested in “greenwashing”.
The public sector is even described as lazy, unmotivated and averse to risk, although participants still consider it to be reliable and more committed to long-term goals.
Paving the way for transformation processes within society
In their home countries they are all actively involved in non governmental organisations (NGOs) and are therefore considered to be social leaders who can pave the way for transformation processes within society.
The region is troubled by a wide range of conflicts, such as the confrontation between Armenia and Azerbaijan concerning the Nagorny Karabakh region and between Georgia and Russia with regard to South Ossetia and Abkhazia.
Disputes often overlap and mutual prejudices run deep.
Cross-border cooperation
The project is supported by the Iris Group and CRISP, partner organisations from Georgia and Germany, and brings together young leaders from civil-society organisations in the Caucasus with the aim of fostering cross-border cooperation and mutual understanding.
In 2013 a total of 2000 people from Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Russia and Turkey participated in individual programmes.
The Social Leader Forum is designed for young potentials active in civil society, the private and the public sectors. Its aim is to encourage them to use a cross-border and cross-sectoral approach to tackle challenges facing society together.
Committed Europeans can be pleased about the first successful European Citizens’ Initiative.
And it’s worth the effort!
We need committed citizens who help our sometimes hesitant politicians to get going.
The instrument of citizens’ initiatives sharpens awareness among Europeans through debates held all over Europe.
A social Europe
Yes, support for the European project has indeed waned in recent years, unfortunately not only in Great Britain.
We are holding debates, including here in Cambridge, on the “democratic deficit”, “youth unemployment”, “regulation mania”, “poverty-driven migration”, “social security abuse” and much more.
I share the British perspective on the situation, namely that we will only regain people’s trust in Europe if we focus on their most urgent problems.
Europe must be a problem solver in the best sense of the word.
Prime Minister David Cameron assesses the value of Europe by how much it contributes to growth.
He asserts that Europe is worth exactly as much as what Great Britain gains from it and calls this “output legitimacy”.
If I may say so that seems to me to be a rather petty way to look at things.
One could rate the value of Hyde Park in the same way by counting how many potatoes one could harvest there.
The EU does not only yield economic benefits which can be quantified, it has a tangible social dimension.
This is what is really important to people; social security which creates the conditions for robust and sustainable growth in the first place.
Without social justice most people will not support reform.
Europe’s foundations rest on the social sphere and need to be stabilised.
The EU is more than just a single market and a single market is more than just a free trade area.
The single market – in the sense of being an integrated, rule-based economic and social area – is still waiting to be completed.
Common minimum standards as well as mutual recognition of educational certificates and qualifications, support for cross-border labour market mobility and the portability of social security rights in the EU constitute its important features.
Forming a real social union in Europe does not entail some kind of Europe-wide harmonisation of national social security systems.
It is much more about dependable coordination in the field of social policy.
Here I am thinking of target ranges and minimum standards in labour market policy, provision for old age, health care, minimum wages and pensions as well as concrete plans to curb youth unemployment.
So you see this is not about soap-box speeches or romantic ideas of social justice, it is about working hard both in and for Europe.
The EU cannot simply be an archipelago of islands of prosperity.
Rather, in the medium term the EU promises to create a high level of economic prosperity and social security, ideally in all member states.
The EU needs to prompt the feeling of winning and not losing, especially among young people.
Yet unfortunately the reality is that the impact of cuts is felt immediately whilst the positive effects of reforms and consolidation are only seen much later.
In this sense we are fighting for a better Europe: a Europe of solidarity, of social cohesion and of shared values.
The initiators of the “Right2Water” campaign have been propagating the right to water and sanitation for all EU citizens and have now collected sufficient signatures from supporters in Europe.
In connection with the European Commission’s Communication on the ECI, published today (19 March), Michael Roth, Minister of State for Europe, issued the following statement:
We need even more of these in Europe.
The Europe of the citizens is not only a topic for grandiose political speeches.
Democracy and citizen-friendliness must be lived.
Minister of State Roth on the European Citizens’ Initiative “Right2Water”:
We are daring to practise more direct democracy in Europe
For the first time a European Citizens’ Initiative (ECI) has obtained the required one million signatures.
Peace in the Middle East:
“When, if not now?”
Barrels of toxic substances
In what was already their third meeting at ministerial level, the German Government and the Palestinian Authority
The German Foreign Minister described them as taking place at a pivotal time in the Middle East peace process.
In view of the current conflict situation, the joint press conference also covered the Crimea crisis.
Steinmeier and Hamdallah during their talks
“I can speak for ourselves, for our country, as well as for the European Union, when I say that
we want to do our bit on the road towards that goal.”
The peace process:
where they agreed to engage in confidential talks over the coming nine months.
The parties have been in close dialogue on all unresolved issues since that time.
Kerry has also been making regular trips to the region.
Agreeing new forms of collaboration
The two sides furthermore agreed to do more in the Palestinian territories to develop the infrastructure required to uphold the rule of law.
The focus here is on criminal justice and the police.
Responsible foreign policy in the Crimea crisis
Its purpose would be to establish a “more objective picture” of the situation on the ground and report on what is being done on Ukrainian territory, particularly by Russia.
The important thing now, he said, was to stand by the country in the coming months as it forms an inclusive government, drafts a constitution and safeguards minority rights.
The Committee’s third session, Steinmeier said, was about “developing new forms of collaboration”.
Agreements were concluded on research and development cooperation as well as more intensive collaboration on training for junior diplomats.
another was for the West to pursue a policy which allows for “ways out of spiralling tensions” to be developed.
In the German-Palestinian Steering Committee, the two sides have agreed to intensify their collaboration,
concluding that it is time for a political agreement in the Middle East peace process.
German-Palestinian talks:
envisaging a two-state solution
have reached agreements on their ongoing collaboration. The Berlin talks were led by Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier and Prime Minister Rami Hamdallah.
He appealed to the Palestinian side to overcome the hurdles standing in the way of a two-state solution.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier addressed Prime Minister Hamdallah of the Palestinian Authority in urgent tones,
saying that he was sure all those involved in the Palestinian territories and Israel knew it was time to agree on a political framework for the two-state solution.
This third meeting of the German-Palestinian Steering Committee, he said, was taking place at a pivotal time in the peace talks.
Steinmeier underlined Germany’s and the whole European Union’s support for the efforts being made under the aegis of US Secretary of State John Kerry.
He pointed out that the EU Foreign Ministers’ talks in Brussels on 17 March had demonstrated a willingness to offer both parties to the conflict the opportunity to enjoy particularly privileged partnership with the European Union.
The aim, according to Steinmeier, was “to show that making the two-state solution a reality will bring something of a peace dividend to all those involved”.
US Secretary of State John Kerry’s negotiating efforts between Israelis and Palestinians are entering the home stretch.
Following months of sounding out, Kerry brought the negotiators of the two sides together in Washington in late July 2013,
Continuing to develop German-Palestinian cooperation
The family photo taken at the third meeting of the German-Palestinian Steering Committee
The German-Palestinian Steering Committee was first convened in 2010.
Its objective is to pool German activities in the Palestinian territories and to intensify German-Palestinian cooperation.
In the joint declaration they signed, Steinmeier and Hamdallah state that today’s talks in Berlin “were guided by the shared vision of a two-state solution to the Middle East conflict”.
Meeting the press with Hamdallah, Steinmeier made it clear that a situation was required “in which two independent states – Israel and Palestine – could live with one another as peaceful neighbours”.
Joint declaration on the Third German-Palestinian Steering Committee meeting in Berlin, 19 March 2014 (PDF, 30 KB)
Another significant issue at Foreign Minister Steinmeier and Prime Minister Hamdallah’s joint press conference was the crisis in Crimea.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier called for an OSCE observer mission to be sent to Ukraine without delay.
Turning to the association agreement to be signed with Ukraine, Foreign Minister Steinmeier clarified that “only the political part, which contains a number of basic political principles” would be signed for the time being.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier at the press conference in Brussels
Foreign Minister Steinmeier reiterated his call for the crisis in Crimea to be handled responsibly.
One element of this, he elaborated, was the sending of clear messages, as the EU Foreign Ministers had done on Monday;
The Federal Government Human Rights Commissioner issued the following statement:
On its way towards political stabilisation, Ukraine is facing major challenges.
one is international law, the other is consular affairs and other legal matters.
Legislation
International law is the legal foundation on which foreign policy is built.
It governs the relations between states and other “subjects of international law”, such as international organisations.
Its key aim is to strengthen the role of law in international relations.
It cooperates with academics and interested members of the public in promoting the concept of international law.
A key priority is advancing the peaceful settlement of disputes by strengthening international jurisdiction.
Its advocacy for the rule of law in international relations includes standing up for human rights and the rule of law in all countries, and represents a fundamental goal of German foreign policy.
It advises all ministries during the negotiation and conclusion of international treaties and makes sure that these comply with the standards and norms of international and German treaty practice.
It watches over treaties from the moment negotiations commence, until the treaty is signed and ratified, promulgated or published, and ultimately registered with the United Nations.
It considers and provides opinions on legal issues concerning the maintenance of diplomatic and consular relations and relations with international organisations.
It cooperates with the Federal Ministry of Finance on issues relating to compensation for Nazi injustice. These range from questions regarding the application of the Federal Act for the Compensation of the Victims of National Socialist Persecution to the highly topical issue of “ghetto pensions”.
This also means that the government must clearly dissociate itself from right-wing nationalists and stand up for the protection of minorities.
Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy meets Chairman of the Association of Jewish Communities and Organisations of Ukraine at the Federal Foreign Office
Today (20 March), Christoph Strässer, the Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid, met Josef Zissels, Chairman of the Association of Jewish Communities and Organisations of Ukraine, at the Federal Foreign Office.
Talking to the Chairman of the Association of Jewish Communities and Organisations of Ukraine, I gained first-hand insights into developments on the ground.
That’s why it is so important now for an inclusive government to adopt policies for all Ukrainians and all parts of the country.
The range of tasks is broad.
In other words, it helps look for missing persons abroad, provides aid in the event of death abroad, assists in crisis situations and natural disasters, and, in the worst case, organises evacuation. It also helps settle international child abduction cases.
It provides consular assistance to Germans imprisoned abroad, helps them find legal support and is involved in requests for extradition and assistance in the execution of sentences.
It coordinates the issuing of visas by the missions abroad, advises them on how best to organise their visa offices and helps optimise the processing of applications.
It reviews difficult visa applications itself, and where necessary obtains judicial clarification.
It deals with issues relating to aliens law and asylum, and is responsible for the constitutional aspects of foreign relations and legal questions arising in connection with the borders of the Federal Republic of Germany.
Excellent bilateral relations with Romania
Foreign Minister Steinmeier met with Romanian Foreign Minister Titus Corlăţean at the Federal Foreign Office on 20 March.
Their talks focused on bilateral relations between Romania and Germany and the current situation in Ukraine.
Steinmeier and Corlăţean at the press conference
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier met with Romanian Foreign Minister Titus Corlăţean at the Federal Foreign Office on 20 March.
Their talks focused on bilateral relations between Romania and Germany, the free movement of workers in the EU, and the current situation in Ukraine.
At the joint press conference with Corlăţean, Steinmeier started out by stating: “When I think of Romania, I think of the final day of the year 2006”.
There was a spirit on the streets that day that we have lost somewhat in recent days and years due to the crisis in Europe.
Excellent bilateral relations
The German Foreign Minister described bilateral relations between Romania and Germany as “not just good, but excellent”.
Among other things, he underscored the strong economic and cultural ties between both countries:
Bilateral cultural relations are close as well.
Steinmeier also praised the trusting and “truly exemplary” relations between the Romanian Government and the German minority in Romania, which numbers nearly 40,000.
Commitment to the free movement of workers
Germany and Romania enjoy excellent bilateral relations.
Both Ministers reaffirmed that the contentious debate that took place at the start of 2014 regarding the free movement of workers in the EU had actually had a positive influence on bilateral relations,
A lot at stake for Russia
Steinmeier made it clear that the world had changed with the end of the Cold War.
Should there be cases in which this policy is abused, they added, these would have to be looked into.
He continued:
They emphasised that, like all EU member states, Germany and Romania are firmly committed to the principle of the free movement of workers.
The most dangerous European conflict in the past 25 years
German-Romanian relations
and that there was still no consensus regarding the formulation of a mandate for an OSCE monitoring mission.
The mission needed to be sent immediately so that the international community can monitor developments.
Clear distance from extremist groups
Steinmeier said that he was in Bucharest that day, and not only did he witness the Romanian people’s enthusiasm on the eve of their accession to the EU, he felt it too.
In this context he outlined what was expected of the interim government in Ukraine:
I wish that Europe could recover some of this spirit of optimism that I saw and felt back then in Bucharest on New Year’s Eve in 2006.
Germany is Romania’s top trading partner and is a leading investor in Romania.
First, the government in Kyiv must gear its policy towards all regions of Ukraine.
Second, it must seriously set to work on drafting a new constitution.
Third, all sides must join in the effort to fully investigate the crimes that were committed on the Maidan.
Fourth, the government must clearly distance itself from extremist groups.
These are the benchmarks which any future Ukrainian leadership must meet.
because it had led to open discussions on challenges and potential solutions in this area.
In light of recent developments, the two Ministers of course also discussed the crisis in Ukraine, which Steinmeier characterised as “one of the most dangerous conflicts to confront Europe in the past 25 years”.
He stated that attempts so far to de-escalate the situation had unfortunately not achieved success,
The Romanian Foreign Minister emphasised that the situation in Ukraine is “deeply worrying”.
adding that national sovereignty is a principle under international law that must be respected by everyone.
Automatisms and dead ends had to be avoided.
... that, even when a conflict escalates, an exit to this vicious circle must always be possible. We must ensure that this option remains open.
Looking specifically at German-Russian relations, Steinmeier expressed his concern that rifts that for many years we believed had been closed were opening up again.
Looking for bridge-builders
Notwithstanding the special responsibility Russia bore in this difficult situation, the Minister said, what was needed was people in our two countries who can build bridges.
Russia: Preventing the reopening of deep divides
He stated that the alteration of national borders on the basis of military actions cannot be accepted,
The ceremony was held in the residence of the German Ambassador to Belgium, Eckart Cuntz.
In his speech to the German-Russian Forum, Foreign Minister Steinmeier called for “clear messages” to be sent to Russia.
The aim, he said, was to ensure that there was always a way out of the vicious circle of escalation.
This year’s annual meeting of the German-Russian Forum was completely overshadowed by the ongoing crisis in Crimea.
In his speech to the 450 or so German and Russian guests present, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier called for “clear messages” to be sent to the Russian side, while emphasising that there always had to be a way out of the vicious circle of escalation.
Cooperation as the logic of the 21st century
Steinmeier addressing the large audience
In his address, Germany’s Foreign Minister deliberately talked about the current difficulties in German-Russian and European-Russian relations.
Given the escalation around Crimea, Steinmeier said, Europe was “experiencing a crisis that can certainly be called the most severe since the end of the Cold War”.
At stake is nothing less than a key building block of the foundation of European peace.
If we do not pay very close attention, we risk losing the progress our societies have achieved and enjoyed since the end of the East-West conflict.
The German Foreign Minister directed clear words to Russia.
It was true, he said, that Russia had closer ties with Ukraine “than many in the West have been willing to admit”.
But President Putin had to “deliver proof” that his country had no territorial interests beyond Crimea.
21st-century logic was “based on cooperation, not on confrontation”.
The attempt to redraw borders seven decades after the end of the Second World War is in violation of international law, and the political consequences – also for a multi-ethnic state such as Russia – have not yet fully emerged.
Steinmeier addressing the German-Russian Forum
Russia, Steinmeier said, was putting itself at greatest risk if, through its actions, it continued down the path of political and economic isolation.
Russia had to agree to the sending of an OSCE mission to Ukraine, particularly in the east and south.
At the same time, Steinmeier went on, Europe needed to do what it can to ensure that “the principles contained in the 21 February agreement become part of Ukrainian policy”.
Remaining ready to talk
With regard to the diplomatic efforts of recent days, Foreign Minister Steinmeier emphasised that it had been a difficult path that was open to criticism.
Nevertheless, he called for all diplomatic efforts to be continued “for as long as possible”.
The priority now was to send clear messages, for Europe to stand as one and to approach the conflict “from the potential outcome”.
He stressed that he was trying to prevent this, not least for the sake of security in and for Europe, which could only be achieved “jointly with, and not against, Russia”.
Award winner Elena Nemirovskaya (2nd from left)
The German Foreign Minister counted among these bridge-builders the Russian Elena Nemirovskaya, who, in her “Moscow School of Political Studies” or “Civic Education”, has been offering seminars on democracy-building since the early 1990s.
Steinmeier thanked this year’s winner of the F. J. Haass Prize awarded by the German-Russian Forum for her “pioneering work for a democratic and critical culture of debate”.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s speech provoked many discussions at the ensuing reception.
He had been addressing the annual meeting of members of the German-Russian Forum in Berlin.
This association aims to organise dialogue and encounters between society in Germany and Russia.
The Dr Friedrich Joseph Haass Prize is awarded by the Forum to people who have done outstanding work to promote German-Russian understanding.
You can read Steinmeier’s speech in full here.
It provides legal assistance to other states in criminal, civil and administrative matters, as well as on issues relating to international taxation, customs, labour and social insurance law, and negotiates agreements with other countries in conjunction with the relevant ministries.
It also answers enquiries from the public in accordance with the Freedom of Information Act, which entered into force on 1 January 2006.
The global fight against racism and discrimination is a key priority for the German Government.
Files spent 60 years in the Belgian General State Archives
To discriminate against people because of their ethnic origin, skin colour, religion, culture, faith, gender or beliefs is to disregard the fundamental rights of every individual.
100 boxes of files are being returned
The files were left behind when the Germans withdrew from Belgium in 1944.
Racism violates human dignity.
Sign of friendship between Belgium and Germany
It would, they said, help to deepen still further the close links between the two countries.
Our duty to do what we can to ensure human dignity is respected is not limited to the international sphere, however.
In Germany too, we need to do more to fight racism and discrimination.
We have not always been successful in this endeavour in recent years.
I would like to use this International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination as an occasion to reiterate the vital importance of combating racism and discrimination in everyday life.
Regrettably, there are many situations in which racism is the rule rather than the exception.
I therefore call for consistent efforts to ensure respect for the dignity of each and every human being.
Marked on 21 March each year, the International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination is intended to recall to mind Article 1 of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights:
“All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights.”
the peaceful demonstrators were brutally beaten by police.
Six years later, on 21 March 1966, the United Nations declared an International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination in response to the massacre.
It has been honoured annually since then to commemorate not only the casualties of the Sharpeville protest but also all those who face racially motivated acts day to day.
The Legal Directorate-General
The work of the Federal Foreign Office’s Legal Directorate-General has two main focuses:
The Legal Directorate-General is the prime German player in this field.
To this end, the Legal Directorate-General advises policy-makers, places its expertise at their disposal, participates in further developing and codifying international law, and is involved in international law dialogue under multilateral auspices, in particular those of the United Nations, the European Union and the Council of Europe.
The Legal Directorate-General thus represents Germany in proceedings before international courts, such as the International Court of Justice in The Hague and the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea in Hamburg, and is conducting a campaign to persuade all countries to accede to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.
The Legal Directorate-General also acts as a kind of solicitor for the entire federal level of Government with respect to international treaties.
Issues relating to the right of diplomatic intercourse (ius legationis) that arise in connection with the activities of our missions abroad and the staff there, as well as the activities of foreign missions and their staff in Germany, are also handled by the Legal Directorate-General.
The Legal Directorate-General also draws up “Headquarters Agreements”, which govern the privileges and exemptions of international organisations based in Germany.
The Legal Directorate-General examines legal issues regarding the status of foreign armed forces in Germany and of the Bundeswehr abroad.
Together with the German War Graves Commission, the Legal Directorate-General is responsible for German war graves abroad and concludes war graves agreements with other countries.
It supports the work of the International Tracing Service in Bad Arolsen and is involved in decisions concerning the ITS’s legal foundation.
It also examines legal issues arising in connection with German unification and succession to international treaties ratified by the GDR.
The Legal Directorate-General is moreover responsible for international law issues relating to the Antarctic and other specific legal fields, such as the international law of the sea, aerospace, international environmental protection and international watercourses.
The second major focus of the Directorate-General’s work is administrative and consular law and other legal matters.
This type of work centres on German nationals and their activities and problems abroad. Should a German national come into conflict with the law and be arrested abroad, should they lose their passport, need assistance or transport back to Germany in a crisis, or simply need to obtain a certificate of inheritance – it is the Legal Directorate-General that is ultimately responsible.
The Legal Directorate-General offers assistance to Germans in trouble.
It coordinates consular work at over 200 missions abroad (embassies, consulates-general and consulates). Matters covered include issuing passports for Germans living abroad, providing emergency travel documents for German tourists who have lost their passports, authenticating foreign documents, providing certifications and dealing with nationality enquiries.
It cooperates closely with European partners to improve consular assistance for EU citizens and on the harmonisation of EU visa policy (Schengen Agreement).
Germans abroad are able to vote in German elections thanks to the work of the Legal Directorate-General, the Federal Returning Officer, the embassies and the consulates-general.
Co-formulating German policy on international jurisdiction is another part of the Legal Directorate-General’s work. It promotes the activities of international criminal courts in various ways, lending its support to the International Criminal Court in The Hague, the International Criminal Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, and the special courts for Sierra Leone, Cambodia and Lebanon.
Files dating from 1914 to 1944 are returned to the German Embassy in Brussels
A ceremony was held on 19 March to mark the official return to Germany's Ambassador in Belgium of files from the German Legation in Brussels and the Consulates-General in Antwerp and Liège dating from the period 1914 to 1944.
On 19 March files from the German Legation in Brussels and the Consulates-General in Antwerp and Liège dating from the period 1914 to 1944 were returned to the German Ambassador to Belgium.
The documents were left behind when the Germans withdrew from Belgium in 1944. Since then, they have been stored in the Belgian General State Archives.
The Director-General of the Belgian General State Archives, Karel Velle, handed over to the German Ambassador a "symbolic" box of files; altogether there are 100 boxes, occupying 17 metres of shelf space.
They were handed initially to the Belgian War Archive and then in 1953 to the Belgian General State Archives.
The digitised files will soon be accessible in the reading room of the General State Archives in Brussels.
Since 2012 work has been going on there to get them ready for their return to Germany: an inventory has been made and translated into German and some of the files have been digitised.
Speaking at the handover ceremony, both the Director-General of the General State Archives, Karel Velle, and the German Ambassador emphasised that, particularly in this year in which we are commemorating the 100th anniversary of the outbreak of World War I, the return of the files is a sign of the friendship between Belgium and Germany.
Ambassador Cuntz and the Director-General of the Belgian General State Archives, Karel Velle
Human Rights Commissioner on Anti-Racism Day
Christoph Strässer, Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid, issued the following statement to mark the International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (21 March 2014):
In the context of the Universal Periodical Review, for example, the handling of the NSU crimes, continued use of racial profiling and the treatment of asylum seekers drew international criticism.
The date goes back to an anti-apartheid demonstration held in Sharpeville, South Africa, in which
Sixty-nine people lost their lives, while another 180 were injured, some of them severely.
The Political Archive of the Federal Foreign Office, where the original files are going to be kept in future, was represented at the handover by Gerhard Keiper.
Rescuing cultural treasures in Mali
During their occupation of parts of northern Mali from early 2012 to early 2013, Islamists not only mistreated the local population and endangered the security of the entire region, but also heavily damaged the country’s cultural treasures.
Since these groups were militarily driven back, Germany has been helping bring these treasures to safety and preserve them.
Rescued manuscript from Timbuktu
The items rescued are precious manuscripts from Timbuktu, the intellectual and spiritual centre of Mali.
These manuscripts hold the twelfth- and thirteenth-century Arab world’s entire body of scientific, philosophical and theological knowledge.
Some of them date back as far as the ninth and tenth centuries.
Human Rights Commissioner Strässer on Turkey’s Twitter block
Many manuscripts are in poor condition and need to be preserved (file photo)
German assistance helped bring more than 4000 of these manuscripts to safety in Bamako, the Malian capital, where they have been stored in archive boxes.
A man from Timbuktu displays his treasures (file photo)
The city of Timbuktu is a UNESCO World Heritage Site, as are its three major mosques and sixteen ancient mausoleums.
Eleven of these mausoleums were destroyed by the Islamists during their occupation of Timbuktu in 2012.
Between 2000 and 3000 documents were burned, but most of the others were rescued.
Some of them were hidden in private homes.
Secret!
It is unacceptable and intolerable for freedom of the press and freedom of opinion to be restricted to such an extent.
The Turkish Government is called upon to reverse the block without delay.
It was made impossible today to access Twitter accounts and to send tweets via Turkish servers.
OSCE monitoring mission gets the go-ahead
Steinmeier pledges additional support for Ukraine
As the crisis in Crimea continues, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier again travelled to Ukraine on Saturday (22 March).
The contrast could not be greater.
When Foreign Minister Steinmeier was last in Kyiv, dozens of people were dying in the violent clashes around the Maidan (Independence Square).
Four weeks on, the situation is very different:
winter has given way to spring, and young families are out for a stroll in the sun on the Maidan.
A sea of flowers commemorates those who died in February.
Steinmeier warns against new rifts in Europe
“Getting this done took days and nights of strenuous effort.
I’m glad that we can now send the OSCE monitors on their way.
Steinmeier with acting President Turchynov
But this spring atmosphere is deceptive.
The crisis is not yet over.
This does not mean that the crisis is over yet, but it’s a step that boosts our efforts to bring about a de-escalation.
As justification, officials cited the need to protect Turkish citizens’ right to individual privacy.
Reconstruction work has now begun.
Pro-Russian demonstrations are being held in eastern Ukraine.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier is profoundly concerned.
Speaking in Kyiv, he told a German Sunday newspaper:
OSCE observer mission on its way to Ukraine
However, there are initial slight signs of deescalation following the confrontation over Crimea.
However, there was no proof at this stage of any actual involvement or complicity in the attack on the part of the Serbian Government.
Steinmeier played a major part in bringing about this agreement. During the difficult negotiations he was in close contact with all involved.
Speaking in Kyiv, the Foreign Minister took a cautious line:
Christoph Strässer, Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid, issued the following statement today (21 March) in response to the Twitter block in Turkey:
In blocking the microblogging site Twitter, Turkey has crossed a line that ought to be taboo for any EU membership candidate.
Despite this, Berlin fully backed the Austro-Hungarian line and its reply was soon forthcoming.
German support for stabilisation in Ukraine
Steinmeier and Yatsenyuk
During his visit Steinmeier told the interim government in Kyiv that Germany would provide further support for stabilisation in Ukraine.
Foreign policy and football:
At the same time, he said he expected the new government in Kyiv to pursue policies for all Ukrainians and welcomed corresponding announcements by Yatsenyuk:
Brazil’s Foreign Minister visits Berlin
Bilateral cooperation is close and amicable – the only fly in the ointment is the difficult question of who will be the 2014 World Cup champion:
Brazil or Germany?
Germany and Brazil enjoy close ties in many areas:
culture, business, joint engagement in international fora.
Surprise meeting with UN Secretary-General
Of some 350,000 ancient manuscripts held in Timbuktu, Dr Abdel Kader Haidara, with international support, was able to save more than 200,000 from destruction. Haidara is a manuscript expert and the president of the non-governmental organisation SAVAMA-DCI.
The Gerda Henkel Foundation, which is particularly dedicated to preserving Islamic culture, has also helped fund the needed preservation measures.
To ensure that practical support for preserving the endangered manuscripts continues in the future, the Federal Foreign Office is inviting international partners of the previous rescue operations to Berlin in April 2014.
Here they will agree on further steps to restore, archive and digitise the manuscripts and coordinate future international efforts to protect these valuable cultural assets.
While retreating from advancing French and Malian troops in January 2013, the Islamists also ravaged the Ahmed Baba Centre for Documentation and Research, which held some 40,000 manuscripts.
Click here for the website of the Gerda Henkel Foundation
The two men briefly discussed the situation in Ukraine and attempts to bring about deescalation.
There is just the little matter of football:
The addition “under all circumstances” has been deleted
Prior to the 2014 World Cup in Brazil Steinmeier presented a football signed by the members of the German national team to his colleague during the latter’s visit to Berlin.
Yet bilateral topics and above all international conflicts were also on the agenda of their meeting,
which focused on the crisis in Ukraine and the situation in Venezuela.
The number of monitors on the ground will be large enough for us to obtain independent and thus reliable information on the situation in Ukraine.
Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Figueiredo
This will make it possible to counter rumours and allegations with facts,
and that should also help to defuse the situation.
Visit to eastern Ukraine
The situation in Ukraine remains unstable and threatening.
Following their talks both Foreign Ministers stressed that they were of one mind on both bilateral and international issues.
Bilateral relations at a very high level
That’s why the monitors must take up their work as quickly as possible.
This is also good news on the eve of my trip to Ukraine.
German-Brazilian relations are wide-ranging. The two countries enjoy close political and economic cooperation.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier also referred to their “extremely close relations”.
He added that cooperation in the area of culture was also very successful.
Ukraine deserves our support as it embarks upon a difficult path of root-and-branch political and economic reforms.
Close cooperation between strategic partners
Germany and Brazil also often stand side by side on the international stage.
Following his various talks in Kyiv, the German Foreign Minister travelled on to Donetsk, a city of a million inhabitants in eastern Ukraine where pro-Russian demonstrations have been held in recent weeks.
In this context Steinmeier stated,
Steinmeier and Taruta
Steinmeier was cautiously optimistic after his talks in Donetsk.
The situation in eastern Ukraine remained anything other than stable, he said.
But his talks in Kyiv and Donetsk had given him confidence.
He had the impression, he went on, that it was now accepted that there would be a new Ukraine.
The region around Donetsk, the Donbass, is vitally important for Ukraine.
South-Eastern Europe was where the Austria-Hungarian and Russian spheres of influence intersected. In the preceding years Serbia had moved ever closer to the Czarist empire.
In the wake of the Crimea crisis, numerous pro-Russian demonstrations have taken place here in recent weeks, sometimes triggering violent clashes.
He said that efforts to protect freedom of opinion on the Internet were continuing
and announced a planned conference in São Paulo in April.
This was intended to bring all the relevant players – government representatives, NGOs, enterprises and universities – around one table.
Ukraine and Venezuela the focus of attention
The two Foreign Ministers took the opportunity to discuss current international issues.
Their talks centred on the crisis in Crimea.
The German Foreign Minister warned that the danger of a new rift forming in Europe was “indeed very real at the moment, with all the risks this entails – ranging from misunderstandings to conflicts which could affect our security situation.”
Steinmeier went on to say,
“You know that we are continuing to work with great intensity to get cooperative solutions off the ground.”
In recent days, Foreign Minister Steinmeier has coordinated closely with Didier Burkhalter, the Swiss Foreign Minister currently chairing the OSCE, and Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov to negotiate the OSCE decision. The final stages of the negotiations called for multiple talks a day.
Foreign Minister Figueiredo agreed with his German counterpart.
He expressed his respect for Germany’s efforts to defuse the conflict and promote dialogue.
Brazil’s Foreign Minister raised the issue of the situation in Venezuela.
Figueiredo reported on the upcoming visit of the foreign ministers of ONASUL members to Caracas.
He explained that at the request of the Venezuelan Government they had received a mandate to support and promote inclusive dialogue in the country.
Germany is currently in the process of selecting its monitors to the OSCE monitoring mission.
Despite their consensus on current political issues, here no compromises could be made.
In my talks with political leaders in Kyiv, I plan to discuss what we can do to assist the upcoming reform process, and I want to get my own sense of the situation in the country based on talks with political decision-makers in Kyiv and eastern Ukraine.”
Centre stage:
a football with the signatures of the German national team
However, Figueiredo also emphasised that Brazil would welcome the German team with open arms and praised their achievements.
He said that he particularly appreciated German football because of its fairness.
Yet the mild weather was evidently not the reason for the good mood shared by the representatives of the two strategic partners Germany and Brazil.
One current example is their collaboration on the Germany Year in Brazil 2013/2014.
“We are working together in many international fora, for example on the reform of the United Nations and the International Monetary Fund.
We hold joint consultations on our representation in international fora and regularly discuss issues of climate protection and resource conservation.”
Both Foreign Ministers stressed that they would be giving their full support to their own national teams.
In this spirit Foreign Minister Steinmeier presented his Brazilian colleague with a football signed personally by the German national team – in anticipation of a fun superlative sporting event.
He explained that with regard to defusing conflicts, he had one principle, “and that is, you cannot afford to start giving up.”
Federal Foreign Minister Steinmeier expresses sorrow on the death of former Spanish Prime Minister Suárez
Not many people know that it was Suárez who, at the end of the Franco dictatorship, launched the bold reforms in Spain that ushered in a new democratic era.
Document of the month:
The “blank cheque” of 1914 Following the assassination of the heir to the throne, Austria-Hungary considered taking military action against Serbia.
Thereupon Kaiser Wilhelm II declared that Germany would support the Danube monarchy as required by alliance obligations.
This was at the top of the telegram later known as the “blank cheque”.
Following the assassination of the heir to the throne, Austria-Hungary considered taking military action against Serbia.
Thereupon Kaiser Wilhelm II declared that Germany would support the Danube monarchy as required by alliance obligation – this was the so-called blank cheque.
What became later known as the July Crisis of 1914 began with an exchange of letters.
On 5 July 1914 Austro-Hungarian Emperor Franz-Joseph wrote to Kaiser Wilhelm II indicating that he was considering taking military action against Serbia.
His motive was the Externer Link, öffnet in neuem Fensterassassination of the heir to the throne, Archduke Franz-Ferdinand, in Sarajevo a few days previously.
The Emperor and his top officials were convinced the neighbouring country of Serbia was behind the attack
and had given the assassins instructions and weapons.
“As required by alliance obligations”
On behalf of Kaiser Wilhelm II, Reich Chancellor Theobald von Bethmann Hollweg on 6 July 1914 sent a telegram to the German Embassy in Vienna.
In this telegram the German Kaiser pledged to“stand by Austria-Hungary, as is required by the obligations of his alliance and of his ancient friendship.”
In the draft of the telegram, now in the keeping of the Federal Foreign Office’s Political Archive, the addition “under all circumstances” has been deleted.
In 1879 the Danube monarchy and Germany had concluded the so-called “dual alliance”; later on Austria-Hungary increasingly became Germany’s most important and virtually sole ally.
Nevertheless, the German Empire’s top officials were well aware of the risks associated with the so-called blank cheque.
The geopolitical situation was tense.
It is possible that the authorities in Vienna and Berlin hoped despite this to keep the conflict local – a vain hope, as it turned out over the following weeks and months.
In retrospect the “blank cheque” is seen as a milestone leading to the outbreak of World War I.
Telegram of Kaiser Wilhelm II and Reich Chancellor Bethmann Hollweg to the German Embassy in Vienna (“blank cheque”)
His name will always be associated with the successful restoration of democracy in Spain.
globalisation, support for Africa and the things he
learned sharing a student flat
Born in Detmold
Lawyer
Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs
Stones or Beatles?
What did you learn sharing a student flat?
Why did you go into politics?
What motivates you?
How important is Europe for us?
How long will we be helping Afghanistan?
What are the benefits of globalisation?
Why more engagement for Africa?
After I got my doctorate, after my years at university, I was looking around for a way to see something other than university.
politics was my career.
German-Ethiopian relations
German-Tanzanian relations
Dar es Salaam, commercial hub of Tanzania
Steinmeier has arrived in Ethiopia, the first stop on his visit to Africa.
Nevertheless, we should not lose sight of all the opportunities globalisation brings, for instance that countries like Brazil and China are gradually taking on greater responsibility for the world.
And we need to make use of this responsibility, and hopefully this readiness to take on responsibility, to create the better world of the next hundred years.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier travels to Africa
Foreign Minister Steinmeier arrives in Addis Ababa
Foreign Minister Steinmeier arrived this morning in the capital of Ethiopia, Addis Ababa.
Startseite: Talks with UN Special Representative on sustainable development goals
Africa has long since ceased to be the continent of crises, conflicts and wars; rather, many places in Africa have gained stability, whole regions in fact.
That could be our task:
to put down anchors of stability in Africa.
Talks with the UN Special Representative on sustainable development goals
Minister of State Maria Böhmer met Amina Mohammed, Special Representative of the UN Secretary-General, in Berlin for talks on new sustainable development goals.
Established in 2002, the African Union works for integration, peace and security, democracy and human rights.
Following today’s (21 March) decision by the Permanent Council of the OSCE (Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe) to deploy a monitoring mission to Ukraine, Foreign Minister Steinmeier stated in Berlin:
A meeting of the African Union in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier today (23 March) issued the following statement on the death of former Spanish Prime Minister Adolfo Suárez González:
“The news of the death of former Spanish Prime Minister Adolfo Suárez leaves me greatly saddened.
During those difficult transition years his government did much of the groundwork required to build the rule of law and a public administration whose decisions were not arbitrary but taken in accordance with proper procedures.
Democrats throughout Europe will remember his achievements.
To his children and family we offer our deepest sympathy.”
The African Union (AU) was founded in 2002 as the successor to the Organization of African Unity.
According to its founding charter, the AU mandate encompasses all fields of political, economic and social co-existence.
In this connection, Germany appreciates the work that African states are doing to take on more direct responsibility and to build an African peace and security architecture.
In particular, the AU is intended to advance economic and political integration, safeguard peace and security, foster sustainable development and promote democracy, human rights and good governance in Africa.
The AU has 54 members,
At the same time, it is important to pay attention to ongoing risks associated with conflicts and fragile state structures.
meaning all countries of the African continent are represented except Morocco. Morocco does not belong to the AU because of the conflict over the Saharan Arab Democratic Republic, which many states do not recognise.
The most important organs of the AU are as follows:
Steinmeier pledges support for Ukraine
As the crisis in Crimea continues, Steinmeier visited Kyiv and Donetsk to get an idea of the situation and show support for Ukraine on its difficult road to increased stability.
In the Ukrainian capital Kyiv and the eastern mining city of Donetsk near the border with Russia, he got a picture of the situation and pledged further support for political and economic stabilisation in Ukraine.
The situation in Ukraine remains tense
The German Foreign Minister and his Polish and French counterparts were able to help bring about an end to the violence only with great difficulty.
Commenting on that in Kyiv on Saturday, Steinmeier said: “The barricades were burning, the city was clouded with black smoke, shots were being fired all over the place.”
By reaching for Crimea, Russia has called Ukraine’s territorial integrity into question.
“I am very worried that the attempt to cast doubt on internationally recognised borders in countries in our European neighbourhood 25 years after the end of the Cold War will open Pandora’s box.”
Following a meeting with Ukraine’s acting Prime Minister, Arseniy Yatsenyuk, Steinmeier once again warned against opening up new rifts in Europe, saying:
“We are meeting here today because we know the situation remains dramatic.”
Steinmeier talking to a German OSCE expert
On Friday (21 March), after days of difficult diplomatic negotiations, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) agreed to send an observer mission to Ukraine.
In order to remove Russia’s objections, Steinmeier was on the phone to his Russian counterpart Sergey Lavrov in Moscow almost daily during this phase.
“This is not the political solution to the conflict, but it could help ensure that the tensions here do not spill over into renewed violence and bloodshed.”
“You have stated that the rights of minorities will be taken into account.
These are positive signals, and that’s what Ukraine needs in this situation.”
For his part, Ukraine’s acting Prime Minister expressed his pleasure at the signing of the political section of the EU Association Agreement with Ukraine.
He also asked for assistance in the fight against corruption and in efforts to reduce Ukraine’s energy dependence on Russia.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
Steinmeier also met UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon outside the official seat of the acting Prime Minister.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier also held talks with acting President Oleksandr Turchynov and opposition politician Serhij Tihipko.
In the city, shaped by mining and heavy industry, Steinmeier met various people, including the Governor of the region, Serhij Taruta, with whom he had comprehensive talks.
While in Donetsk, the Foreign Minister took the opportunity to hear from a German OSCE expert about the tense security situation in the region.
Shortly before Steinmeier’s arrival in Donetsk there had again been pro-Russian demonstrations outside the district administration buildings – though far fewer protesters turned out than the 10,000 initially expected.
This region, which borders Russia, is home to mining and heavy industry and is the country’s industrial heartland.
Around 20 percent of Ukrainian economic output is generated here.
There is a strong Russian influence in the region.
Assembly of Heads of State and Government:
Prior to departing for Africa, Steinmeier stated:
The Minister of State is the German representative in the UN Open Working Group on the post-2015 process.
It’s worth taking a closer look and investing more in our partnership with Africa.
convenes every six months; presidency rotates annually (currently Malawi)
prepares for the meetings of Heads of State and Government at foreign minister level
Pan-African Parliament:
comprises 265 representatives elected by the parliaments of the AU member states;
This process follows on from the United Nations Millennium Development Goals which are due to come to an end in 2015.
The Working Group is to submit a proposal on new sustainable development goals to the UN General Assembly.
has an advisory and supervisory function;
convenes in
Midrand, South Africa
AU Commission:
executive organ/secretariat of the AU with headquarters in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia;
In this connection, Minister of State Böhmer was last in New York from 2 to 5 March to take part in the Open Working Group’s consulations.
Economic, Social and Cultural Council (ECOSOCC):
mouthpiece for African civil society with advisory function and 150 members
African Court on Human and People’s Rights:
seat in Arusha, Tanzania
The German Foreign Minister added:
Peace and Security Council (PSC):
fifteen rotating members meet on a regular basis in Addis Ababa; practical decision-making organ with extensive powers in the areas of peace and security
Financial institutions (African Investment Bank, African Central Bank and African Monetary Fund) are also planned or being developed.
All three of the countries that I will be visiting have posted dynamic levels of growth for years and are committed to regional integration and development.
Click here to visit the African Union website
African Peace and Security Architecture (APSA)
AU headquarters in Addis Ababa
This is just as much a part of Africa’s reality as the conflicts in Mali, Somalia and South Sudan.
Expanding Africa’s peace and security architecture
The establishment of the AU in 2002 laid the foundations of a peace and security architecture for the whole continent (APSA: African Peace and Security Architecture).
With it came the understanding that the Africans and their regional organisations should take increased responsibility for peace and security on the continent.
Their discussions will focus on the roles that the AU and Ethiopia play in Africa.
The AU is duty bound to intervene in severe cases of human rights abuse or when there is a threat of genocide.
It is also committed to the principle of ostracising regimes that have assumed power in violation of a country’s constitution and imposing sanctions on them.
Accordingly, the AU membership rights of the Central African Republic, Guinea Bissau and Egypt are currently suspended.
The AU reflects Africa’s initiative in taking responsibility for the construction of a peace and security architecture for the entire continent.
A meeting with civil society representatives will also focus on domestic political conditions in Ethiopia.
As a collective security and early warning system (in line with Chapter VIII of the UN Charter), ASPA is intended to facilitate prompt and effective responses to crises and conflict situations.
Its central organ is the Peace and Security Council (PSC).
The Council is supported by a Military Staff and a “Panel of the Wise”, whose function is to offer mediation.
African peacekeeping troops in Burundi, Darfur and Somalia
UNAMID soldiers in Darfur
The African Standby Force (ASF) will provide the central pillar of the architecture in future. A framework concept was agreed in 2004.
The Department for Peace and Security of the AU Commission combines the functions of executive and secretariat.
A Pan-African Early Warning Unit is also attached to the Department to steer ongoing AU peacekeeping operations.
The AU began with a peacekeeping force in Burundi (AMIB) back in 2003, followed by the AMIS mission in Darfur (now UNAMID), AMISOM in Somalia and MISCA in the Central African Republic.
These missions are not yet based on the idea of a standby force, but depend on voluntary undertakings by the troop-contributing nations.
The Federal Foreign Office supports the development of APSA by, amongst other things, helping to develop the police component of the ASF and construct a building for the Department for Peace and Security of the AU Commission in Addis Ababa.
EU-AU relations
The EU is the AU’s most important partner with regard to financial support and capacity-building.
The Commissions of both organisations work closely together and meet on a regular basis.
The EU is also the key partner for the development of an African peace and security architecture.
The goal is to enable Africa to prevent or successfully manage African crises, also if necessary through the deployment of African peacekeepers.
In order to do justice to the growing significance of Africa for Europe, the first EU-Africa Summit in Lisbon in 2007 adopted the Joint EU-Africa Strategy and Action Plan, which were then reaffirmed at the second Summit in 2010.
The Strategy placed the relationship between the neighbouring continents on a new footing and extends beyond development issues.
The next EU-Africa Summit will take place in Brussels on 2 and 3 April 2014.
Pan-African University
Since 2009 the African Union has been planning to set up a Pan-African University (PAU).
The new building is expected to be completed by the end of 2014.
The aim of founding the PAU is to promote science and technology on the African continent, coordinate research and development and improve general and vocational education.
Other objectives are closer cooperation among scientists and researchers, greater mobility for African students and also the establishment of a regional and continental platform for scientific cooperation.
It is expected that the PAU will in the future have five campuses, spread across the whole of Africa, each with its own different specialisation.
The AU is particularly interested in German support for the planned North African campus with its research focus on “Water and energy, including climate change”.
Peace and security in Africa
Africa and the EU
Foreign Minister Steinmeier will be in Tanzania on Tuesday (25 March) for the second stop of his Africa visit.
New AU building
In addition, Steinmeier will get together with students to talk about “50 years of bilateral relations between Tanzania and Germany”.
It is furthermore authorised to speak on behalf of Africa at a global level and also to coordinate the activities of Africa’s regional organisations.
Tanzania is a former German colony that is now one of Germany’s most important partners for development cooperation projects in sub-Saharan Africa.
Organisational structure
Executive Council:
The programme is intended to build their capacity to actively resolve and prevent conflicts (“African ownership”).
Following their meeting at the Federal Foreign Office, Federal Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier and his Brazilian counterpart Luiz Alberto Figueiredo emphasised these shared interests.
So do they always see eye to eye?
Foreign Minister Steinmeier welcomed his Brazilian counterpart Figueiredo to Berlin on a fine spring morning.
Brazil’s Foreign Minister Figueiredo emphasised that one major task was to continue to build on these relations.
He said that they had reiterated their intention to hold joint intergovernmental consultations from 2015 to further strengthen the bilateral relationship.
Figueiredo also recalled the joint resolution they submitted to the United Nations last autumn on the protection of privacy in the digital age.
A ball from the national team and a dilemma
At the conclusion of their meeting 83 days before the opening of the FIFA World Cup in Brazil, the two Foreign Ministers broached the subject of the chances of the two national teams.
In addition, Germany supports regional integration within the East African Community (EAC) and financed the EAC’s new headquarters in Arusha, which were completed in 2012.
Opening of the German-Angolan Economic Forum
Port in Luanda
The final stop on Steinmeier’s trip will be Angola,
where the German Foreign Minister will open the German-Angolan Economic Forum on Wednesday (26 March).
Building African capacities
President (since 2012: Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma) and eight Commissioners elected by AU Assembly every four years
The 14th Ordinary Session of the AU Assembly
In February 2010, in response to a request by the AU, Germany declared its willingness in principle to participate in the PAU project.
German-Angolan relations have intensified in recent years, with economic ties enjoying particular momentum.
Within a short period of time, Angola has become Germany’s third-largest trading partner in sub-Saharan Africa.
This is why the German Government aims to adopt Africa policy guidelines that will serve as the basis for focusing and expanding Germany’s activities in, for and with Africa.
He will also visit an infrastructure project run by a road-building company to get a first-hand impression of the country’s potential for economic development.
Thanks to the country’s political development since the end of the civil war and its large reserves of raw materials, Angola is well on its way to becoming an economic and political heavyweight in sub-Saharan Africa.
Economic and development cooperation in Africa
German-Angolan relations
funding of civilian conflict management and prevention activities (e.g. support for the African Union Border Programme (AUBP) concerned with delimitation, mediation).
On his first visit to Africa during his second term in office, Steinmeier wants to emphasise that Germany views the up-and-coming countries of Africa as partners in efforts to solve global challenges and believes that the resulting economic and social ties will bring opportunities to both sides.
From 23 to 27 March, the Foreign Minister will visit Ethiopia, Tanzania and Angola.
Germany views the countries of Africa as increasingly important players in international affairs and aims to engage in more in-depth exchanges with them on how best to tackle global challenges, among other things.
The Foreign Minister’s trip, which is taking place just ahead of the EU-Africa summit to be held in Brussels in early April, intends to underscore the breadth of Germany’s political, economic and social engagement in Africa.
In recent years, our neighbouring continent has changed much faster than we realise.
A street in Addis Ababa
Steinmeier started his Africa visit on Monday (24 March), arriving in Ethiopia’s capital Addis Ababa for talks with African Union (AU) Commission Chairperson Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma as well as with the President, Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Ethiopia.
Ethiopia itself plays a key role as regional mediator, for example by promoting stability in the Horn of Africa within the framework of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) and by mediating the conflict between the Sudan and South Sudan.
Germany is supporting the expansion of Africa’s peace and security architecture in “concrete” terms by
providing approximately 27 million euros in Federal Foreign Office funding to finance the construction of new premises for the AU’s Peace and Security Department.
50 years of bilateral relations
In Dar es Salaam, he will likewise meet with representatives from government and civil society.
Germany provides roughly 65 million euros in annual development assistance, with bilateral cooperation focusing on the areas of health, water, energy and biodiversity.
Angola:
In Luanda Steinmeier will be meeting with government representatives as well as with opposition members and and civil society players.
The African Union
Under its Peace and Security in Africa programme the Federal Foreign Office funds both bilateral and multilateral assistance for the continent.
In this way it also supports the endeavours to develop an African Peace and Security Architecture.
advising the AU Commission’s police experts on developing the police component of the African Standby Force;
assistance with training for African police officers to be deployed on national and regional security stabilisation missions (e.g. Police Programme for Africa);
Despite the rapid changes taking place in Africa, armed conflicts, political and ethnic tensions, border disputes and fragile statehood in parts of the continent remain obstacles to social, economic and political progress.
Tank of the UN mission in the Congo
This recognition has shaped also the philosophy of the African Union (AU) founded in 2002.
The organisation has evolved an African Peace and Security Architecture aimed at finding “African solutions to African problems”.
The industrialised countries are providing the AU and its members with various kinds of support designed to help them meet their responsibility in this connection.
In 2002 they adopted the G8 Africa Action Plan containing a whole range of assistance measures.
Germany’s G8 Presidency in 2007 saw the Africa Action Plan given new momentum and an initiative to support peace and security in Africa launched.
Africa Action Plan
The programme is intended to build African capacities in the field of peace and security.
The hope is that this will reduce or entirely obviate the need for UN and EU intervention in such situations.
The emphasis is on addressing the causes of conflict as well as capacity- and institution-building. The aim is to enable African actors at various levels – pan-African (e.g. AU), regional (e.g. ECOWAS, EAC, SADC) and national – to find African solutions to African problems.
As part of its efforts to improve structures on the ground, the German Government is funding a variety of projects in Africa in the field of peace and security.
With a budget of some 159 million euros for the period 2008-2014, the Federal Foreign Office is providing assistance in the following sectors:
African Union capacity- and institution-building (e.g. new building for the Peace and Security Department of the AU Commission);
developing and expanding regional training centres for African police officers (e.g. Kofi Annan International Peacekeeping Training Center, KAIPTC, in Accra, Ghana; École de Maintien de la Paix, EMP, in Bamako, Mali) to be deployed on AU- or UN-led peace missions;
Following her trip to the United Nations headquarters in New York, Minister of State Böhmer had talks with UN Special Representative Mohammed on new sustainable development goals.
During her talks with Amina Mohammed, Minister of State Böhmer put forward proposals for the sustainable development goals drawn up in collaboration with France and Switzerland.
Maria Böhmer emphasised that investment in the education and health sectors were particularly important for combating poverty and social inequality on a durable basis.
Steinmeier being greeted at the airport by Ethiopian Foreign Minister Tedros
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier was in Ethiopia on 24 March for the first stop on his visit to Africa.
Despite the early hour of his arrival, Steinmeier was greeted at the airport by his Ethiopian counterpart, Foreign Minister Tedros.
Ethiopia: a key mediator
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and Ethiopian Prime Minister Hailemariam Desalegn
He met in Addis Ababa with members of the government and representatives of the African Union (AU).
He met in Addis Ababa with government leaders and the Chairperson of the African Union (AU) Commission.
Steinmeier assured Foreign Minister Tedros that Germany wants to further enhance its support for the training of security forces on the African continent.
We are living in a time when regional conflicts rarely remain restricted to a particular region.
The numerous clashes on the African continent also have an impact on Europe.
Talks with the African Union
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and AU Commission Chairperson Dlamini-Zuma
Following his meeting with Prime Minister Hailemariam, Steinmeier convened with Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, Chairperson of the African Union Commission, at the AU Commission headquarters.
Touring the AU building financed by Germany
Building Africa’s peace and security architecture
The first stop on Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s trip to Africa was Ethiopia.
This support is also in Europe’s interest, Steinmeier added, stating:
The Foreign Minister stated that he himself aims to help change Germany’s perception of Africa.
Their talks focused on the AU’s role in Africa.
Further information on the project is available here.
Finally, at an evening meeting with civil society representatives, Steinmeier’s talks also turned to domestic political conditions in Ethiopia.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier arrived on the morning of 24 March in Ethiopia’s capital, Addis Ababa.
Ethiopia acts as a key mediator in East Africa, for example by promoting stability in the Horn of Africa within the framework of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) and by mediating the conflict between the Sudan and South Sudan.
He emphasised that, along with a focus on Africa’s trouble spots, Germany’s Africa policy also needs to place a priority on regional integration in Africa, an area where Germany can bring its own experiences in the European Union to bear.
This is a good reason, he stated, to work together even more closely in the future.
AU Commission Chairperson Dlamini-Zuma added that there is particular potential for cooperation between Germany and the AU in the area of education and training.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier is visiting Ethiopia, Tanzania and Angola from 23 to 27 March.
Not militarily, of course, but for instance by providing training for the security services there, and continuing to support the country’s civilian reconstruction, so that the schools, hospitals, roads and everything else we and others have got going there over the past 12 years can continue to function.
If work’s finished before 10pm, that’s a good end to the day.
If there’s time for a good film and a glass of red wine, so much the better.
And that’s how I ended up in Lower Saxony, in the first SPD-Green coalition in the regional parliament under Gerd Schröder.
Frank-Walter Steinmeier, Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs, on
Frank-Walter Steinmeier, Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs, on globalisation, support for Africa and the things he learned sharing a student flat
Football: Schalke or BvB?
Both. As Foreign Minister you don’t have a choice!
Schalke forever!
Well, above all that it’s better to be with others than alone.
That you learn to be considerate to others.
I think, despite all the ups and downs – and
being a politician isn’t always a barrel of laughs – I think despite all the difficulties it’s the possibility to make a difference, contrary to what many people might fear or believe, and really to have an influence and help shape the world.
Hardly any other job gives you that possibility. That’s why I enjoy it.
There’s a lovely sentence Hans-Dietrich Genscher once said, and I like to use it in my speeches too. He always said:
That’s exactly right.
Our military engagement will stop at the end of this year, but Afghanistan needs a future and so we will have to remain involved there.
To help ensure this, the Federal Foreign Office is supporting police training not only on a bilateral basis but also at African centres in West and East Africa that train personnel for multilateral peace missions.
The Cabinet introduces itself: Foreign Minister Steinmeier
The Cabinet introduces itself
Aged 58
In politics for 39 years
Definitely the Stones
And that you learn to calculate the number of conflicts you’re going to get into with your fellows. Oh, and I learned to cook as well.
It wasn’t a decision I took at any specific point. I just sort of grew into it.
That turned into 15 years working together, and at some point there it was:
The risks are obvious, and actually they’ve been talked about so often there’s really no need to repeat them.
State Secretary Jens Walter of the Baden-Württemberg Ministry of Science, Research and the Arts will be present for the ceremony, as will Agnieszka Morawińska, Director of the National Museum in Warsaw.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier on the death sentences in Egypt
After the war, it was brought to the Wiesbaden Central Collecting Point, from where it found its way to Heidelberg University and later to the Staatsgalerie Stuttgart.
This restitution demonstrates our mutual trust and will generate important momentum in our two countries’ ongoing dialogue on cultural property.”
The Guardi piece was confiscated from the National Museum in Warsaw by German authorities in 1939.
Germany is opposed to the death penalty as an inhumane form of punishment.
He was able to witness first-hand the expansion of African peace and security architecture on his tour of the new premises housing the AU’s Peace and Security Department, which are being financed by the Federal Foreign Office.
He then proceeded to the National Palace to meet with President Mulatu.
After talks among the delegation members and a brief tour of the Palace gardens and its lion enclosure, the German Foreign Minister then reconvened with Foreign Minister Tedros.
At a joint press conference, Steinmeier praised Ethiopia as an important partner that plays a key role in helping to resolve numerous regional conflicts and that has taken on responsibility by participating in AU peace missions.
Germany assists the training of security forces
Established in 2002 as the successor to the Organization of African Unity, the AU testifies to Africa’s initiative in taking responsibility for the construction of a peace and security architecture for the entire continent.
After the meeting, Steinmeier emphasised that events in recent years have demonstrated that the world is moving closer and closer together: regional crises on one continent have effects on the other, as shown for example by the financial crisis in Europe or the conflicts in Somalia and the Sudan/South Sudan in Africa.
Germany is already providing a very concrete contribution to Africa’s peace and security architecture by financing the new building housing the AU’s Peace and Security Department. The Federal Foreign Office has allocated approximately 27 million euros to finance the new premises, which are still under construction. The German Foreign Minister and his delegation had the opportunity to tour the site following their talks with the AU.
I call upon the Egyptian judicial authorities concerned to revoke these sentences and let the accused have a fair trial.
Looted from Warsaw’s National Museum and brought to Germany during the Second World War, Francesco Guardi’s painting “Palace Stairs” is to be handed over to Polish Foreign Minister Radek Sikorski by Federal Minister Steinmeier at the Federal Foreign Office on 31 March 2014.
The two Ministers have issued the following statement in the run-up to the hand-over:
A key factor in the success of African peace missions is the availability of well-trained personnel.
Partners in Europe Germany and Russia share a centuries-old history which has often been difficult.
Both sides depend on each other when it comes to dealing with key issues.
It is still true to say that security in Europe can only be guaranteed by working together with Russia, not against it.
Despite the current crisis the two sides depend on each other when it comes to dealing with key international issues.
Modernisation Partnership:
In 2008 Germany and Russia agreed on a Modernisation Partnership to intensify their cooperation in key spheres such as the law, health policy and demography, energy efficiency, transport infrastructure, as well as basic and further training.
Germany cooperates with Russia on numerous regional and global issues and has always been keen for it to be an active player in multilateral institutions.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier talks about his trip to Ukraine in an interview published by Die Welt on 24 March 2014.
I am well aware of the danger of slipping into a new confrontation in the middle of Europe.
Russia’s constitution of 1993 formally guarantees all human rights and civil liberties, and its leaders regularly reaffirm their commitment to them.
There is an ongoing dialogue between the governments in which difficult issues are discussed.
Economic exchange and increasing economic ties are key factors in German-Russian relations.
I am delighted that our extraordinary diplomatic efforts within the OSCE succeeded in bringing about a decision to deploy a monitoring mission to Ukraine.
Russia underlined its intention to become even more closely integrated into the global economy following its accession to WTO in summer 2012.
The mission can help us to gain an objective perspective on events there, especially in southern and eastern Ukraine.
This is an initial step towards de-escalation, which is being supported by Moscow and Kyiv.
Now we have to try to build on this initial small success.
But make no mistake:
the situation, especially in eastern Ukraine, is anything but stable.
I was able to get a first-hand impression myself on Saturday in Donetsk.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement in Addis Ababa today (25 March) on the death sentences handed down to members of the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt:
“It is with the greatest concern that we are following the news of hundreds of death sentences being handed down to members of the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt.
Neither the verdicts nor the trials are in conformity with rule-of-law standards nor do they uphold the principles of human rights to which Egypt has committed itself.
Further mass sentencing must be stopped.
These verdicts are deepening the political divide in Egypt.
In order to prevent the country from destabilising, an inclusive political process and a policy of national understanding and reconciliation are of the essence.”
What can an OSCE monitoring mission really accomplish?
For three days – and nights – we engaged in intense negotiations. We were close to a deal a number of times, but then negotiations broke down over minor details or shifts in the political climate.
Chancellor Merkel spoke with Ukrainian Prime Minister Yatsenyuk in Brussels, and OSCE Chair Didier Burkhalter was very actively involved in the process.
This makes me all the more pleased that it worked out in the end.
This is the moment where the spiral of escalation has been interrupted for the first time since the onset of the crisis.
And what does that mean specifically?
For us, it was important that we can now counter intentionally spread rumours and politically motivated allegations with facts.
Dietmar Woidke and Władysław Bartoszewski, the Plenipotentiary of the Polish Prime Minister for International Dialogue
That in itself already helps to de-escalate the situation.
What is Putin trying to achieve?
The Coordinator’s task is to work towards mutual understanding and trust and, in particular, to submit proposals for concrete political solutions to the German and Polish Governments.
Strengthening intersocietal cooperation
Putin has compared the annexation of Crimea with German reunification...
The comparison speaks for itself.
What many people experienced as liberation from the Communist yoke is perceived very differently by some people in Moscow.
He will be particularly committed to encouraging more Germans to learn the Polish language.
Do Europeans have the means to prevent Russia from swallowing up other parts of the former Soviet Union?
The development of a shared border region only started in 1990/91 following the conclusion of the border and good-neighbourliness treaties and still faces many social, political and administrative obstacles today.
On the Polish side the post is held by Władysław Bartoszewski, State Secretary for International Dialogue in the Chancellery of the Polish Prime Minister.
if Russia should reach beyond Crimea, we Europeans will take decisive measures, even if we have to put up with economic disadvantages as a result.
Dietmar Woidke’s predecessors in office were Professor Gesine Schwan and former Minister of State Cornelia Pieper.
The G8 is one of the most effective bodies at the international level and constitutes an international forum for dialogue in which Europe, the United States and Russia have engaged in close cooperation.
German businesses are cautioning against sanctions...
I take such admonitions seriously.
Economic sanctions always hurt both sides.
What is your advice to Kyiv?
The situation in Kyiv is extraordinarily complicated.
Forces of the far right were also involved in the toppling of the Ukrainian government.
Is the West being naive about what is transpiring in Kyiv?
The vast majority of people on the Maidan were taking action in favour of democratic values.
Can Ukraine hope to join the European Union?
Reproduced with the kind permission of Die Welt.
Looted from Warsaw’s National Museum and brought to Germany during the Second World War, Francesco Guardi’s painting “Palace Stairs” is to be handed over to Polish Foreign Minister Radosław Sikorski by Federal Minister Steinmeier at the Federal Foreign Office on 31 March 2014.
This restitution is a symbolic expression of mutual trust.
Only then can we avoid self-made dead-ends.
Is this crisis teaching us a lesson about the weakness of Europe and the West as a whole?
“I see no weakness in the policies we are pursuing”
Closer cooperation in the border region
Dietmar Woidke’s second priority will be the promotion of closer cooperation in the German-Polish border region, as it deserves particular attention.
The Coordinator will strive to give this development new impetus.
The office of Coordinator was established in 2004 by the Governments of the Federal Republic of Germany and the Republic of Poland at the initiative of former Brandenburg Minister-President Matthias Platzeck with a view to further strengthening the good-neighbourly ties between the two countries.
And make no mistake:
Russia is already internationally isolated today.
Even close allies in the Commonwealth of Independent States are keeping their distance from Moscow.
I was able to get a sense of that myself during my talks there.
The interim government has to hold the country together, prepare elections and stabilise the economic situation while simultaneously launching necessary domestic reforms.
The political leaders there have clear ideas about how they want to stabilise their country.
In any event, the attempt to suppress the Russian language was a mistake that the interim government has fortunately corrected.
Ukraine has taken a first step towards Europe by signing the political provisions of the Association Agreement.
Now the main priority is to stabilise the country, politically and economically.
The European Union has offered extensive financial assistance for this purpose, and this is the issue that we should be concentrating on right now.
It would be good if Russia would get involved in these efforts as well.
For different reasons, both Russia and Ukraine have an interest in the deployment of monitors in Ukraine – Moscow more in the west, and Kyiv more in the eastern and southern parts of the country.
I also wonder whether Russia, which is itself a multi-ethnic state, has thought the potential impact of its actions all the way through.
What consequences would it have if Russia were to be excluded from the community of leading economic powers?
In his speech, he shared his feeling that Africa was developing very fast and in many different ways, which made it hard for the German idea of Africa to keep pace.
Speech by Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier at Dar es Salaam University
The talks I held in Kyiv and Donetsk gave me confidence.
We’re also working on an action plan to provide Ukraine with practical assistance on top of that.
Mr Steinmeier, does the current situation remind you of the Cold War?
But it’s not too late to prevent that from happening.
That’s why we are continuing to do everything in our power, in close cooperation with our partners, to defuse this extremely dangerous conflict.
I can’t even remember how many times I spoke with Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov on the phone.
We were able to negotiate such a large number of monitors that hardly anything going on across the whole country is likely to escape the mission’s notice.
We cannot ignore the fact that Russia’s actions in Crimea violate the central foundations of the European framework for peace.
I am greatly concerned that the attempt to redraw internationally recognised borders in our European neighbourhood – 25 years after the end of the Cold War and in violation of international law – will open up a Pandora’s box.
That’s not the situation we’re in, and I hope that things don’t get to that point.
This is a valuable resource that we shouldn’t frivolously place at risk.
But Russia’s actions have caused cooperation with Russia within the framework of the G8 to be suspended – correctly – for the time being.
It’s now up to Russia to decide if it wants to remain part of the club in the future.
And sanctions by themselves don’t constitute smart foreign policy.
That’s why we have to remain level-headed, to think about how we want the conflict to end, and to shape our policies towards Russia in a way that does not lead to dangerous automatic reactions.
We’re sending clear messages, we’re reacting swiftly and coherently.
At the same time, we remain willing to talk – and that’s true for both sides of the Atlantic.
It’s an important sign that the EU and the IMF have already indicated that they are prepared to provide financial assistance to Ukraine.
But we’re not turning a blind eye to the extremists on the margins.
That’s why I again stated clearly to Prime Minister Yatsenyuk in Kyiv that we expect the new political leadership in Kyiv to protect the rights and interests of all Ukrainians – regardless of their background, religion or language – and to distance itself from extremists.
Tanzania is now one of Germany’s most important partners for development cooperation projects in sub-Saharan Africa.
Pivotal position between East, Central and Southern Africa
G8 – The Group of Eight
A further topic of the talks was Tanzania’s role in the region.
The appointment of a Coordinator of German-Polish Cooperation shows that Poland has become one of Germany’s most important partners in Europe in the political, economic and cultural spheres.
Coordinator Dietmar Woidke’s top priority is to strengthen intersocietal cooperation.
This means consolidating and extending the existing network of bilateral institutions, non-governmental organisations and social and cultural initiatives.
The country is thus in a pivotal position between East, Central and Southern Africa.
With regard to its domestic policy, Tanzania is considered stable.
The most visible part of the G8 process is the annual Summit, to which the heads of state and government are invited by the country holding the Presidency usually around halfway through the year.
They also serve as the launchpad for joint G8 initiatives.
Previous Summits
The most recent G8 Summit was held at Lough Erne, Northern Ireland, on 17 and 18 June 2013.
with the G8 agreeing to share data and information to combat tax evasion.
A primary topic was tax systems,
Multinationals will in future have to inform fiscal authorities in what countries their profits are gained and their taxes paid.
Developing countries are to receive help collecting the taxes owed to them.
Another of the many other topics discussed was the violent conflict in Syria.
The G8 agreed to provide another 1.5 billion US dollars between them for humanitarian activities in Syria and neighbouring countries.
Federal Chancellor Angela Merkel pledged 200 million euros in assistance on behalf of Germany.
The G8 also called for a political solution to the Syrian conflict.
A second international Syria conference is to be convened in Geneva as soon as possible.
It is intended to examine the possibility of “a transitional government with full executive powers” for the country.
G8 discussions at Camp David in the United States
The 2012 Summit at Camp David in the US (18-19 May) focused on the debt crisis in the euro area.
The G8 agreed to boost productivity, growth and demand in their national economies while at the same time pursuing policies of fiscal consolidation.
G8 meetings at ministerial level too
The G8 foreign ministers also meet on a regular basis to discuss foreign policy issues.
Its main focuses were the situation in Syria, the tensions in the Korean Peninsula and the ongoing conflict surrounding the Iranian nuclear programme.
More on the G8 foreign ministers meeting in London
How does the G8 process work?
The G8 process is more than just a series of summit meetings.
They meet several times a year.
The G8 themes: Africa, non-proliferation, and the fight against terrorism and organised crime
The implementation of the G8 Africa Action Plan, drafted with considerable input from the Federal Foreign Office, is the responsibility of the Chancellor’s G8 Personal Representative for Africa, who is from the Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development.
The G8 mandates groups of experts on an ad-hoc basis to research individual topics, such as the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction or the international fight against organised crime and terrorism.
the decisions made by the Group have a binding effect politically and are presented to other multilateral bodies jointly by the G8.
More documentation is available from the University of Toronto’s G8 Information Centre:
http://www.g8.utoronto.ca/
The G7 had already halted all preparations for the Sochi Summit on 2 March.
This year’s meeting will instead take the form of a G7 Summit in Brussels on 4 and 5 June.
Who are the G8?
Russia’s exclusion will remain in place until circumstances have been established in which meaningful discussions can again be held in the G8 context.
G7: The Hague Declaration, 24 March 2014
Welcome to Dar es Salaam:
“Islands of stability in Africa”
In the morning it seemed as though a technical problem with the plane might mess up Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier’s travel plans.
Interview given by Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier to Deutsche Welle in connection with his current trip to Africa.
Take-off was delayed, but in the end Steinmeier and his delegation arrived safe and sound at their second African destination:
In Dar es Salaam, the Minister is meeting members of the Tanzanian Government and giving a talk at the local university on “50 years of bilateral relations between Germany and Tanzania”.
The situation in Ukraine is extremely tense. Europe is facing a dangerous crisis.
This anniversary and the close partnership between the two countries in development cooperation are the focus of the visit.
Is this the right time for a trip to Africa? Are you even able to focus on the countries you are visiting here, Mr Steinmeier?
After his visit to Ethiopia, the German Foreign Minister travelled to Dar es Salaam on Tuesday (25 March).
He was met at the airport by Foreign Minister Bernard Membe.
It's early in the morning as Foreign Minister Steinmeier again sets off for Ukraine.
Membe visited Berlin most recently in December 2013.
It isn’t as if we ever have the chance to concentrate on one single conflict in the world and block out all the others.
Later in the day, Steinmeier had a meeting with President Jakaya Kikwete.
A long shared history
In the plane on the way to the Ukrainian capital, Kyiv, and the eastern city of Donetsk, the Minister outlines the aims of the trip.
But in the past few weeks and in the current situation it is particularly difficult to leave the conflict in Ukraine behind and focus exclusively on Africa.
The two countries are celebrating 50 years of bilateral relations this year.
We are, of course, constantly in contact with Berlin and with the German Embassy in Kyiv.
In the afternoon, Steinmeier paid a visit to Dar es Salaam University and had an exchange with students on 50 years of bilateral relations between Tanzania and Germany.
Nonetheless, it is still very important that we show our respect for the three African states we are visiting here and also demonstrate that other things are not always more important.
The German Foreign Minister thanked the students of the Tanzanian-German Centre for Eastern African Legal Studies for the invitation.
The two countries’ joint history dates back way beyond these 50 years:
In previous years have we talked too much about equal partnerships and shown too little respect?
the former colony of German East Africa comprised not only mainland Tanzania, but Rwanda and Burundi as well.
It is certainly true to say that Africa has changed more quickly than our perception of Africa.
During World War I it was conquered by British and Belgian troops, who subsequently divided the territory.
There's an air of spring in the city, even on Independence Square, the Maidan.
Tanzania is host country of the East African Community (EAC), a member of the Southern African Development Community (SADC) and host to the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
Four weeks ago things were very different.
While remaining one of the world’s poorest countries, Tanzania is enjoying strong economic growth.
The barricades are still in place.
Regional focuses:
Published on 26 March 2014 at www.bild.de
And the people are commemorating those who died at the end of February.
The press conference came after comprehensive talks between the two delegations.
At the same time, he called for the rights of minorities to be respected.
To round off his talks in Kyiv, the Minister visited the Verkhovna Rada, the Ukrainian parliament.
There he met acting President Turchynov.
The two men discussed the situation in Crimea and the possibilities for reaching a political solution to the crisis.
Then the German Foreign Minister and his delegation headed on to Donetsk in eastern Ukraine.
Maybe it reveals the deeply ingrained phantom pain that some people in Moscow continue to feel more than 20 years after the disintegration of the Soviet Union.
Proposals made by the G8 have repeatedly paved the way towards solutions to difficult international problems.
That doesn’t mean that the African continent has suddenly become a continent with a thriving economy and free democracy and human rights.
But it has perhaps become more diverse.
In conflicts like these, even in an escalating crisis, it’s crucial to keep communication channels open and to keep holding up visible signs that say “off-ramp out of this conflict”.
It is good and important that Europe and the United States are closely coordinating their actions in this crisis.
The hotspots are still there, the bilateral conflicts between states, often also clashes between governments and ethnic and religious minorities.
All this still exists.
in my view, it is by no means certain that the “Crimean undertaking” will turn out to be a success for Russia in the long run.
A development that we in Europe have always yearned to see.
We always talk about German foreign policy being shaped by values and interests.
We discussed this very intensively with the Ethiopian Prime Minister, who was also very forthright in his own arguments.
He insists that Ethiopia must go its own special way.
As a long-term goal we agree
You are visiting three stable countries.
Developments in Africa have a direct impact on us.
At the end of your trip Gerd Müller, Federal Minister for Economic Cooperation and Development, will then travel to Mali and South Sudan.
Is that distribution of tasks deliberate:
the Foreign Minister goes to the prosperous countries, the Development Minister to the crisis-ridden countries?
No, that’s not the case.
Must Germany deploy more servicemen and women in Africa?
The majority of the talks in Ethiopia focused on the situations in Somalia, South Sudan and the central conflict here between Ethiopia itself and Eritrea – that, too, is a conflict region!
I started my Africa trip in Ethiopia to show that the seat of the African Union embodies more than just hope.
They covered everything from developing trade relations to developing the economy, but above all they centred on safeguarding security and peace.
What I have observed is that
We want to be able to provide them ourselves.”
Their request to us is:
The question is generally:
How can Germany, how can Europe help Africa?
How can Germany benefit from Africa?
Neither the G7 nor the G8 are a world government.
As long as Russia does not change its course we can’t just carry on with business as usual.
Can Russia stay in the G20 and in the UN Security Council?
Just as Africans were affected by the European crisis for many years, simply because very little in the way of funds was available, because individual states in Europe were simply not in a position to look after their African cooperation partners, we are now similarly affected by crises within Africa, mostly by refugee flows.
Russia is and will remain our eastern neighbour.
The same goes for North Africa, when I look at the developments in Tunisia.
Of course, we should be concerned about the situations in Egypt and Libya.
It would appear that the escalation there has not yet come to a head.
I phoned the outgoing Prime Minister, who was quite flummoxed and asked me, “Why are you phoning me?”
Going back to the topic of interest-driven foreign policy:
one destination of your trip is Angola, a country rich in raw materials.
Are raw materials the main asset we expect to gain from Africa?
Let me emphasise once again
The G8 family photo at the Lough Erne Summit
Speaking to the press afterwards, Foreign Minister Steinmeier was cautiously optimistic in his assessment of his trip to Kyiv and Donetsk:
Undoubtedly it is the most prosperous of these three countries from an economic perspective, but lagging behind as far as its political development is concerned.
But I am just trying to show that
At the beginning of your term of office you announced an Africa strategy.
Would you not have liked to come here with a formulated strategy?
Late in the evening the Minister's plane took off for Berlin.
But one thing is clear:
Steinmeier will remain committed in the coming weeks to bringing further stability to Ukraine.
We must be able to carry on talking to each other.
Nobody wants to cut off avenues of communication.
Are we facing a new Cold War?
But we can no longer afford to overlook the fact that there are also growing havens of stability, even with bilateral or regional cooperation.
How do you address human rights issues in places such as Ethiopia, a country in which practically no opposition is tolerated?
that the Ethiopian Government also wants to see democracy and the observance of human rights.
But he says that Germany and Europe have more than one hundred years of development behind them, and that Ethiopia will not take as long to get there.
We must get back to constructive relations.
We took note of this but still pointed out that in our experience it is not possible to separate economic development from democracy.
Of course, many tasks are unfinished – but we in Germany and Europe underestimate all the achievements that have been made.
This is a first step in the right direction.
Crimea has been lost.
The AU has gained authority in its dealings with the African states and is accepted as the chief negotiator with international organisations, including with the EU.
The AU is playing an active role in conflicts within Africa, with around 70,000 military servicemen and women working as peacekeepers or defusing violent situations.
nobody expects us to deploy service personnel in military operations, in fact the reverse is almost true.
Many people here are saying, “We are fed up of asking for troops from Europe, America, the UN.
The key word is African ownership.
“Help the African states and the AU to consolidate their own skills.”
That is why in the future advisory services, training and provision of equipment will be even more important than we in Germany have realised.
Each affects the other both positively and negatively.
These days hardly any conflict is solely regional.
perhaps quite tentatively at the moment in East Africa, where we are seeing the first shoots of regional cooperation in Kenya, Tanzania, Rwanda and Burundi.
Must NATO show more clout?
However, Tunisia has managed to launch a new constitution in a difficult internal process and is now preparing for a democratic change of government.
There is no reason to doubt this.
I then told him, “I want to thank you for stepping down and paving the way for election preparations and a democratic change in the political leadership of your country.”
Is there a red line?
And that is why we benefit when islands of stability are created in Africa,
That was a major personal achievement which also obliged him to turn his back on his own political career.
that Tunisia is currently in the midst of a special development, and one which deserves our support.
that we have wide-ranging relations with Africa and the AU which also allow us to benefit from peaceful and stable development in individual regions of the continent.
Likewise, the destinations included in this visit are so varied that you can’t just reduce the point of this trip to the superficial safeguarding of raw material interests – on the contrary.
Tanzania, for example, is a country that is not bound to us by raw material interests, but by a long tradition of political ties.
And Angola is a third example which falls into another category entirely.
Of course, you can’t totally disregard interests in the context of foreign policy.
That would be naive, or, if  the Foreign Minister said it, dishonest.
And if there is any?
It is not just a question of a formal strategy.
Anyone who has been active in politics for a few years knows that it is wise to first take time to think about where you want to end up.
But we know also that reality has a habit of ignoring papers and concepts.
So the task is to confront the concepts and ideas with the reality and thus have the chance to improve the concepts – and that is why I am here on this trip at a stage when the Africa concept is still on the drawing board.
What is the Chancellor’s influence on the Russian President?
Without these efforts the situation would have escalated further.
Can you still sleep well given the Crimea crisis?
This requires and justifies all our efforts.
With Russia’s consent the monitoring mission can now also go to eastern Ukraine.
But has Putin now been stopped?
Moscow knows that we will step up the pressure if it wants to take more than Crimea.
Everybody knows this and so does Moscow.
Interview given by Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier to the Bild newspaper on the situation in Ukraine and his trip to Africa.
Frank-Walter Steinmeier on a trip to Africa (Ethiopia, Tanzania, Angola) in the midst of the Ukraine crisis:
has your plane gone off course?
The crisis in Europe is depressing but the world isn’t standing still.
It’s therefore right to also invest time and energy in our neighbouring continent.
All the people I’ve spoken to have emphasised that Africa wants to resolve its crises on its own.
We can and should support the continent’s efforts.
Above all, this means training, promoting development and supporting regional cooperation.
Let’s turn to Crimea:
the G7 have excluded Russia.
We still want constructive relations with Russia.
There must be no new rifts in Europe.
I don’t like this idea – and nobody can seriously want that.
The ball is now in Russia’s court.
We have responded emphatically to Russia’s action, which violates international law.
Throwing our military weight around is certainly not the right answer; nobody in the German Government wants that.
NATO members must be sure their allies will protect them.
Serious politics is not child’s play.
The EU has agreed on different levels of sanctions.
Germany plays an important role in the crisis.
Our European partners are looking to us, and even in critical moments Angela Merkel and I have kept the communication channels with Moscow open.
If I were to get any sleep at all it would be a good thing!
in the last four weeks there have been some days where meetings, talks and telephone calls never seemed to end, not even at night.
But this crisis is the most serious one Europe has seen in the last 25 years.
“Nobody can want a Cold War”
Without Russia major conflicts cannot be overcome, as we’ve seen in Syria and Iran.
Africa is important to us and is changing much more rapidly than many of us think.
Is the dream of a world government thus over?
But seriously:
Philipp Mißfelder, Coordinator of Transatlantic Cooperation at the Federal Foreign Office, issued the following statement today (26 March) on the EU-US summit:
The conflict surrounding Iran’s nuclear programme
Signs of the clashes with the security forces can still be seen everywhere.
At a joint press conference with Ukraine's acting Prime Minister, Arseniy Yatsenyuk, Foreign Minister Steinmeier left no room for doubt when he said:
I think we have heard very clearly here today that there is a pressing desire for the new Ukraine to be a united Ukraine, that there must be no secessions.
This doesn't solve anything; it is not yet the political solution we've been looking for, but it may be some sort of foundation from which we can work.
Together with the United States, Russia, China, France and the UK, Germany is working in the group known as E3+3 to find a diplomatic solution to the Iranian nuclear conflict.
Joint Action Plan, 24 November 2013
On the one hand, Steinmeier wants to gain a first-hand impression of the situation on the ground.
On the other, he wants to show the people of Ukraine that Germany and Europe pledge continuing support for the stabilisation of the country.
People here on the Maidan, like many others, are concerned about Russia's activities in Crimea.
The integration of Crimea into Russian territory created facts which run counter to international law.
During the meeting, Steinmeier welcomed the new Ukrainian government's readiness to undertake reform.
The city, which has a million inhabitants, is near the border with Russia and is the heartland of mining and heavy industry in Ukraine.
The talks in Donetsk focused among other things on the pro-Russian demonstrations in the region in recent weeks.
In his last meeting of the day in Ukraine, Steinmeier discussed the current situation with a German inspector working in Donetsk on behalf of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE).
The day before the Minister's trip, the OSCE agreed to send an observer mission to Ukraine, not least at the initiative of the German Foreign Minister.
Shortly before flying back to Berlin, Steinmeier spoke to the press about the difficult negotiations on the OSCE mission:
It's good that it has at least proved possible to reach agreement, even with Russia, on the need for, the composition of and the mandate for the OSCE observer mission.
After days, indeed weeks, in which we have seen the situation escalate from day to day, this is a small signal of de-escalation.
Both sides must be able to maintain and advance their standards of protection.
Weimar Triangle: Foreign Minister Steinmeier to meet his French and Polish counterparts in Weimar
Federal Government Human Rights Commissioner Strässer on the number of death sentences and executions 2013
On Wednesday (26 March), US President Barack Obama, European Council President Herman Van Rompuy and EU Commission President José Manuel Barroso met in Brussels for an EU-US summit to discuss transatlantic cooperation.
The last EU-US summit took place in Washington in November 2011.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier has invited his French and Polish opposite numbers, Laurent Fabius and Radek Sikorski, to Weimar on 31 March and 1 April 2014 for talks within the framework of the Weimar Triangle.
Six concrete steps were to be implemented within three months, including the granting of access to Gchine uranium mine and Arak heavy water production plant; in both cases access has now been granted.
IAEA report on Iran
EU and US sanctions
The talks with the AU and its leadership were truly amazing: confident yet also driven by a responsibility for development in Africa.
Let’s turn it around:
foreign policy cannot be reduced to and cannot afford to reduce itself to that level. For us, the political aspect is paramount.
On the one hand, Iran is being offered comprehensive cooperation should it cooperate with the international community on the question of its nuclear programme.
On the other hand, should Iran not cooperate, sanctions are aimed at persuading Iran to yield to the demands of the international community on the nuclear question.
These measures include far-reaching restrictions in the financial sector (further restriction of business relations with Iranian banks, listing of the Iranian central bank), an oil and gas import embargo and a ban on the construction and supply of oil tankers as well as comprehensive designations of key Iranian institutions and businesses.
They want to develop new foreign and European policy initiatives beyond day-to-day politics.
The vast majority of all executions in 2013 took place in only six states.
The three Foreign Ministers are meeting in the town where this format originated to discuss how they can work together to inject fresh impetus into the EU.
At the same time it is encouraging to see that the international trend towards abolishing capital punishment continues unabated in many parts of the world.
The death penalty is an inhumane punishment which does not make any sense in terms of legal policy.
The German Government is against capital punishment under any circumstances and, together with its EU partners, is resolutely campaigning for its universal abolition.
Campaigning against the death penalty
Minister of State for Europe Michael Roth meets Baltic State counterparts
It is an anachronism in the 21st century!
Minister of State Roth with his Estonian colleague Mart Laanemäe
After the meetings Minister of State Roth commented as follows on 26 March:
This is evident from our countries’ joint positions on many topics regarding European and international policies.
The current crisis in Crimea shows how important close cooperation is within Europe.
We Europeans will continue to stand side by side and make it clear that the EU will not allow itself to be divided.
Estonia Country Profile
Latvia Country Profile
Exceptions are in place above all for the supply of medicines, foodstuffs and humanitarian goods.
Minister of State for Europe Michael Roth has met his counterparts from Estonia and Latvia in Berlin.
Heavy water reactor in Arak, Iran
The steps taken by the United States include comprehensive new sanctions in the fields of energy, shipping and mining, as well as in certain areas of the financial sector, directed above all at foreign persons and businesses indirectly supporting the Iranian oil industry or the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Michael Roth exchanged views with Mart Laanemäe, Undersecretary for Europe and Transatlantic Relations at the Estonian Foreign Ministry, who has a profound knowledge of Germany.
EU and US sanctions on trade in gold and petrochemical products have been suspended.
Laanemäe obtained his PhD in Germany and served as Estonian Ambassador in Berlin from 2008 to 2012.
The US has also set aside restrictions on the automotive sector and civil aviation.
Advancing disarmament
Mine clearance in Bosnia and Herzegovina
On the way to becoming an economic heavyweight
The Annual Disarmament Report, as it is called, offers a comprehensive overview of the major international challenges and main developments in the area of disarmament and arms control.
Please click here to read the Annual Disarmament Report 2013:
Luanda, Angola’s capital, has seen a real construction boom in recent years.
On the final leg of his visit to Africa, Foreign Minister Steinmeier was in Luanda on Wednesday, where he opened the German-Angolan Economic Forum.
Its most recent development puts Angola well on the way to becoming an economic and political heavyweight in sub-Saharan Africa.
The German Foreign Minister’s first meeting on Wednesday morning was with Angolan Economics Minister Abraão Gourgel.
Improving the economic situation and lifting sanctions were central issues in the election campaign of Iran’s new President, Hassan Rouhani.
United Nations decisions to date
The Security Council has also decided on several occasions to impose internationally binding sanctions.
The resolution contains balanced measures aimed at persuading the Iranian leadership to review its position.
The sanctions relate to restrictions on trade with Iran, the insurance and financial sector, the transport sector, investments in the oil and gas industry as well as new visa bans and the freezing of accounts held by the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps.
However, the resolution contains no measures directed at the Iranian civilian population.
The supply of goods and technologies which could contribute to Iran’s controversial nuclear programme has been banned.
An extensive arms embargo has also been imposed on Iran
There are also travel bans in place for certain individuals who are involved in the Iranian nuclear programme.
Specific measures are aimed particularly at members of Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, who are closely involved in the nuclear programme.
In addition, decisions were also taken on a ban on all weapons exports from Iran, the right to inspect suspect vessels on the high seas, restrictions on Iran’s financial sector and a call to grant the Iranian Government no more state credits (except for humanitarian and development purposes).
a warm welcome from one Foreign Minister to another
In Dar es Salaam, the Minister met members of the Tanzanian Government and gave an address at the local university on “50 years of bilateral relations between Germany and Tanzania”.
On the second leg of his trip to Africa, Foreign Minister Steinmeier held talks with members of the Tanzanian Government and gave an address on bilateral relations at Dar es Salaam University.
This anniversary and the close partnership between the two countries in development cooperation were the focus of the visit.
Tanzania was the second leg of Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier’s trip to Africa.
The talks in Dar es Salaam focused, among other things, on German-Tanzanian relations.
Christoph Strässer, Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid, issued the following statement today (27 March) to mark the publication of Amnesty International’s Report Death Sentences and Executions 2013:
The figures published by Amnesty International today on the increase in the number of executions around the world are alarming.
In particular, the high numbers reported from Iraq and Iran are extremely worrying.
Steinmeier used the opportunity to introduce the Minister to members of the business delegation who were accompanying him on his trip to Africa.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier introducing members of the business delegation
A continent of progress – but progress all too often ridden with conflict, fragility and inequality.
Sometimes I feel that Africa is developing much more quickly and much more diversely than our German view of Africa can keep up with.
Following his visit to the university, Steinmeier once again met his counterpart, Bernard Membe.
Afterwards, Foreign Minster Steinmeier opened the German-Angolan Economic Forum.
Steinmeier and Kikwete agreed that the cost of the renovation would be divided between the two Governments in addition to contributions from the private sector in Germany.
Thanks to its political development since the end of the civil war and its large reserves of raw materials, Angola is well on its way to becoming an economic and political heavyweight in sub-Saharan Africa.
Numerous challenges remain, however, such as high levels of corruption and limited access to democratic and economic life.
From Angola, Germany imports almost exclusively crude oil, natural gas, and petroleum products,
while mainly exporting vehicles and equipment.
Growth and social justice go together
A downpour in Luanda
In the speech he gave to German and Angolan business delegates, Steinmeier spoke about the “major opportunities” that cooperation held for both countries.
In many areas, he said, things were still in the early stages,
Steinmeier mentioned the MS Liemba, a German ship which has been carrying passengers across Lake Tanganyika for almost 100 years, saying it was a symbol of the long-standing, valuable ties between the two countries.
with the developmental leaps Angola had made in recent years now calling for thoroughgoing expansion of infrastructure, from roads to power grids to waste disposal.
In the evening he had a meeting with President Kikwete in the presidential palace.
The subjects on the agenda included the planned constitutional reform in Tanzania and the renovation of the MS Liemba, a project dear to both Germany and Tanzania.
Now the planning can go ahead, so that the Liemba can continue to sail on Lake Tanganyika even after its 100th birthday in 2015.
On arrival in the country, Steinmeier headed first to Dar es Salaam University, where he addressed a large audience of students and professors from the Tanzanian-German Centre for Eastern African Legal Studies on “50 years of bilateral relations between Germany and Tanzania”.
“These are fields,” Steinmeier emphasised, “in which Germany has a lot of expertise.”
He went to point out that sustainable growth would be contingent on a broad social base:
However, the German Foreign Minister also turned his attention to Germany’s current way of looking at Africa:
Today Africa is a continent of opportunity.
It is a continent where societies develop fast and in manifold ways, thanks to their creativity, optimism and modern technologies.
It is a continent that international investors race to.
An economy can only grow if conditions are good for its people – if they have education, rights, a welfare safety net, and if they know
growth and social justice, growth and reliable administration, growth and a reliable justice system –
Click here to read the full text of Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s speech.
Intensifying economic and political cooperation
There have been major doubts and questions about the peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear programme since 2002.
Meetings are to be held monthly until June 2014 with the aim of finding solutions to the entire range of disputed issues.
In line with this approach, the US and EU are keeping up the pressure on Iran until a comprehensive agreement is reached that resolves the nuclear dispute.
Under the Geneva Joint Plan of Action of 24 November 2013, sanctions are being eased in some areas for the duration of the agreement.
Iran is being given the possibility to repatriate 4.2 billion US dollars of its oil income blocked abroad.
The sanctions imposed on the oil industry and financial sector in particular are having a negative effect.
Minister of State for Europe Michael Roth met his Baltic State counterparts from Estonia and Latvia in Berlin this week.
Following a meeting during his first official visit to Riga on 20 December 2013, this was the second time Michael Roth had met his Latvian counterpart, Andrejs Pildegovičs.
Their talks focused on the current crisis in Ukraine and the cooperation between Germany and the two Baltic States on European issues.
Estonia and Latvia are reliable partners for Germany within the European Union.
Steinmeier with Angola’s President dos Santos
During the morning, Steinmeier met his counterpart, Rebelo Chicoty, at the Angolan Foreign Ministry.
The subsequent short drive to the President’s official residence took rather longer than expected: the delegation were caught in a veritable downpour,
which turned the streets of the capital into rushing torrents within minutes.
Delayed and soaked through, the delegates nonetheless made it to the presidential palace, where Steinmeier held talks with President Eduardo dos Santos.
Now, he said, his hopes were for further collaboration in the form of a contact group.
Meeting the opposition and civil society
Foreign Minister Steinmeier with representatives of civil society in Luanda
Alongside his talks with representatives of the Angolan Government, Steinmeier also spoke to representatives of civil society in the afternoon.
They told him about the role of civil society in the country’s development ten years after the end of the civil war.
The German Foreign Minister afterwards had the chance to talk to members of the opposition.
The day ended with a visit to the São Miguel fortress and a final look at the Luanda panorama – its many building sites and cranes a fitting symbol of the changing continent that Frank-Walter Steinmeier witnessed during his three-day trip to Africa.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier visited Ethiopia, Tanzania and Angola from 23 to 27 March.
On his first visit to Africa during his second term in office, Steinmeier wanted to emphasise that Germany viewed the up-and-coming countries of Africa as partners in efforts to solve global challenges and believed that the resulting economic and social ties would bring opportunities for both sides.
Speech by Foreign Minister Steinmeier at the opening of the German-Angolan Economic Forum (26 March 2014)
Foreign Minister Steinmeier in Ethiopia:
Building Africa’s peace and security architecture (24 March 2014)
Foreign Minister Steinmeier in Tanzania:
50 years of bilateral relations (25 March 2014)
In the press conference afterwards, given jointly with Foreign Minister Chicoty, Steinmeier spoke about the current situation in Ukraine.
It is still true to say that security in Europe can only be guaranteed by working together with Russia, not against it.
Within the framework of German cooperation with Russia the Federal Government also addresses the human rights situation in the country.
Intergovernmental consultations held alternately in Russia and Germany provide the highest ranking format for this dialogue. The most recent consultations took place in Moscow on 16 November 2012.
Steinmeier meets the Foreign Minister of the Republic of Korea
On the final leg of his visit to Africa on Wednesday (26 March), Foreign Minister Steinmeier opened the German-Angolan Economic Forum and met representatives of Angola’s Government, opposition and civil society.
Here too, the focus was on economic and political cooperation between Germany and Angola.
He described the OSCE observer mission agreed on last Friday as “a step in the right direction”.
EU-US summit sends a clear signal for the transatlantic partnership
Today's summit sends a clear signal that the transatlantic partnership has found new strength.
Both sides of the Atlantic want to reinvigorate their cooperation, especially on issues of crucial importance for the future, like the climate, energy, data protection and cyber security.
Through their close coordination during the last few weeks, the partners in the transatlantic alliance have sent a strong message that they stand as one vis-à-vis the steps taken by Russia.
It is important and right that both sides have clearly committed themselves to the planned Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP).
The USA and the EU are each other's most important trading partners. A common free trade area will create new growth opportunities for the EU as a whole and for Germany as an export nation, especially for small and medium-sized businesses.
The lifting of customs duties and other trade barriers would be a help to people in Germany and create new jobs.
It is therefore right to be optimistic about the TTIP.
However, we can only reach a comprehensive and ambitious agreement by bringing on the public on board.
It was President Obama's first time visiting the European institutions.
Back from his trip to Africa, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier met his Korean counterpart Yun Byung-se on 27 March.
The talks in Villa Borsig in Berlin focused on the further development of German-Korean relations as well as current international issues.
Strässer emphasised that it was thanks not least to Zülch that Sinti and Roma were a recognised national minority in Germany today.
In his address, Human Rights Commissioner Strässer pointed to the difficult situation Sinti and Roma still encounter.
The prize was awarded to Tilman Zülch.
European Civil Rights Prize of the Sinti and Roma presented at the Federal Foreign Office
An honourable tradition which deserves to be continued:
Hungarian duo
As the ceremony began, the Europasaal at the Federal Foreign Office was filled with gentle music:
a Hungarian duo played a piece by the composers Ferenc Snétberger and Elemér Fehér, both members of the Roma community.
One of the most important awards in German society
Human Rights Commissioner Strässer then directed a few very personal words to the assembled guests.
He was, he said, moved and proud to be able to welcome the 250 or so guests to the Federal Foreign Office.
He hoped that this honourable tradition would be continued and said:
Christoph Strässer praised the award
The European Civil Rights Prize of the Sinti and Roma was awarded in awareness of their tragic history, Strässer went on.
Speech by Christoph Strässer, Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid, at the award ceremony for the European Civil Rights Prize of the Sinti and Roma at the Federal Foreign Office
In awareness of the tragic history of the Sinti and Roma
Romani Rose in the Europasaal
Even though the minority still suffered exclusion and stigmatisation, he said,
a great deal had happened and much had improved.
Guardi’s “Palace Stairs” to return to Poland
Since 1979 Sinti and Roma have had an organised body to represent their interests and increase their visibility, so that finally they were recognised as a national minority.
Engagement from the heart of society
State Secretary Jürgen Walter of the Baden-Württemberg Ministry of Science, Research and the Arts will be present for the ceremony.
“We are both very glad that this significant work of art is returning to Poland, to the National Museum in Warsaw, after 75 years.
It demonstrates the success of our dialogue on cultural property and provides fresh momentum for its committed continuation.”
Tilman Zülch was an important pioneer in this process, having campaigned throughout Europe since the late 1970s with his Society for Threatened Peoples for the rights of Sinti and Roma and against discrimination and racism.
Human Rights Commissioner Strässer, too, expressed his admiration for Zülch,
and extending his thanks to him.
The European Civil Rights Prize of the Sinti and Roma is awarded by the Documentation and Cultural Centre, the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma and the Manfred Lautenschläger Foundation.
The Federal Government Report on Progress on Arms Control, Disarmament, Non-Proliferation and the Development of the Capabilities of the Armed Forces presents the main focuses of German disarmament and arms-control policy for the 2013 reporting period.
Furthermore, it illustrates Germany's aims and the measures it undertakes in the disarmament sector.
Close German-Danish relations
Foreign Minister Steinmeier has met Danish Foreign Minister Holger Nielsen, who was on his first official visit to Germany, at the Federal Foreign Office.
Syria was one of the items on the agenda.
At the Federal Foreign Office on Thursday, Foreign Minister Steinmeier met the Danish Foreign Minister Holger Nielsen, who was on his first official visit to Germany.
He became Danish Foreign Minister in mid-December 2013.
Frank-Walter Steinmeier stressed that there were “no complaints” about the state of bilateral relations “because experience has shown relations between Germany and Denmark to be good”.
The Ministers cited the expansion of cooperation in the transport sphere as well as the joint efforts to ensure the control of conventional weapons as examples.
What is more, they stated that both countries were champions of European freedoms, including freedom of movement.
Experience in our two countries has shown that competitiveness and a social security system go hand in hand and that together they generate economic success in our societies to the benefit of our people.
The German Foreign Minister went on to say that the two countries were working to preserve this competitiveness and social security system and “to ensure that Europe as a whole regains its economic and social stability.”
It was vital to prevent a permanent “split” between Northern and Southern Europe.
Frank-Walter Steinmeier said that he wasn’t expecting Denmark to join the eurozone anytime soon.
Syria a focus of the talks
The two Ministers expressed their great concern that the bloody conflict in Syria was continuing and that the number of refugees was still on the rise.
Steinmeier stated that the refugees and the conflicts “which were spreading from Syria into neighbouring countries” were placing too great a burden on Turkey, and above all on Jordan and Lebanon.
The German Foreign Minister went on to say that “progress had to be made towards defusing the conflict” at the next peace conference in Montreux (Switzerland) on 22 January.
The next step needed to defuse the conflict was access for humanitarian assistance.
Danish Foreign Minister Nielsen added that the conference could lend renewed momentum to the “political process”.
He went on to say that both Germany and Denmark supported the “moderate opposition forces” in Syria.
Denmark – just like Germany – was involved in the destruction of chemical weapons and was working to improve the humanitarian situation in Syria.
The first cargo of Syrian chemical weapons had left the country at the start of this week on a Danish vessel.
Click here to read more about Denmark and German-Danish relations
Relations with Germany
Russia is one of the EU’s key partners.
Relations, however, are currently having to bear the strain of the crisis in Ukraine.
The EU is Russia’s most important partner when it comes to the economy and modernisation (accounting for around 50% of trade and 75% of investment).
speaking at the award ceremony for the European Civil Rights Prize of the Sinti and Roma, Christoph Strässer, the Federal Government’s Human Rights Commissioner, praised the award winners’ and organisers’ commitment to fighting discrimination and protecting human rights.
However, he also reminded his audience that in many countries in Europe the situation of Sinti and Roma still gave cause for concern.
At the EU-Russia Summit in Brussels, 28 January 2014
This year’s winner of the European Civil Rights Prize of the Sinti and Roma is the human rights activist Tilman Zülch.
For the fourth year in a row the Federal Foreign Office and the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma hosted the award ceremony to honour individuals and organisations who have made an outstanding contribution to protecting and enforcing the human and civil rights of Sinti and Roma in Europe.
The award winners have worked to tackle exclusion and ensure the minority’s inclusion into society over the past few decades.
Strässer reminded the audience that human rights were “the fertile soil and spring from which every human society emerges, which allow peace and justice to take root”.
Since 1997, relations have in practice been based on the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA),
Unfortunately, he continued, their situation still gave cause for concern today.
which sets out, among other things, when and which EU and Russian ministers are to meet in Permanent Partnership Councils and what priorities should be fixed in economic and cultural relations.
However, the PCA no longer fully reflects current circumstances.
This year’s award winners:
Zülch, Elmazi (of Amaro Drom e.V.) and Romani Rose (l. to r.)
saying he could not conceive of German human rights work without him
Negotiations have therefore been going on since 2008 to draw up a new framework agreement and thereby create a comprehensive, reliable, long-term basis for political, economic, trade, scientific and cultural relations.
It is endowed with 15,000 euros and the Special Prize with 5000 euros.
The award is now in its fourth year and is presented at the Federal Foreign Office.
In my view, this civil rights prize is one of the most important awards and honours that German society and of course the Roma and Sinti themselves have to recognise commitment to their minority.
The aim of Germany’s human rights policy, Strässer underlined, was to enforce civil, political, economic, social and cultural human rights all around the world.
The Chairman of the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma, Romani Rose, very movingly traced the community’s difficult path, from persecution and extermination in the Third Reich to the present day.
This year’s Special Prize went to the intercultural youth organisation Amaro Drom, which brings together Roma and non-Roma and turns young people into active, critical, responsible citizens.
Strässer praised the organisation’s work at the heart of society to promote exchange between young people from different backgrounds.
On this basis EU-Russian relations have intensified in many areas in recent years.
In view of Russia’s moves to annex Ukraine’s Crimean peninsula, those negotiations were suspended by a European Council decision on 6 March 2014, which also imposed travel bans and asset freezes on 33 individuals who bear responsibility for those developments.
Negotiations on an expanded visa facilitation and readmission agreement have been stopped for the time being.
It is not yet possible to say when all the conditions for visa-free travel will be put into place by the two sides.
Trade relations in the energy sector are especially important for both sides,
with Russia meeting about 20 percent of the EU’s oil needs and around 45 percent of its gas requirements – and with those numbers rising.
Russia is in the Eurasian Customs Union together with Kazakhstan and Belarus, which is to evolve into a Eurasian Economic Community by 2015.
Dialogue on cultural property:
First official visit by Qatar’s Foreign Minister to Berlin
Frank-Walter Steinmeier was yesterday sworn in by Federal President Joachim Gauck as Foreign Minister of the new Grand Coalition.
On 27 March, Qatar’s Foreign Minister, Khalid Al Attiyah visited the Federal Foreign Office.
Alongside bilateral relations, his talks with Foreign Minister Steinmeier focused on the current challenges facing the international community, such as the Middle East conflict as well as the situation in Syria and Egypt.
Bild: Qatar’s Foreign Minister Al Attiyah during his visit to Berlin
On welcoming his counterpart Al Attiyah to Berlin, Foreign Minister Steinmeier stressed that Qatar was an important player in the Gulf “of significance and with influence in the entire Arab-Muslim world and beyond.”
Support for the two-state solution in the Middle East
Germany and Qatar reaffirmed once more their support for the intensive efforts for peace undertaken by US Secretary of State John Kerry in the Middle East.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier reiterated “that this initiative by Kerry deserved every success.”
Continued dramatic situation in Syria
Bild: Joint press conference with Qatar’s Foreign Minister Al Attiyah
The situation in Syria remains extremely critical.
With the Gaddafi regime having ended in October 2011, Libya is set to make a fresh start.
The country now needs to tackle state-building.
Germany has provided rapid humanitarian aid and is working with the international community to support Libya’s state-building efforts.
The elections to a General National Congress in July 2012 and the forming of a Government in late October 2012 were important milestones on Libya’s road to democracy.
The efforts to find a peace settlement are being continued in Germany and Qatar and “broader and wider approaches” were being sought.
Steinmeier said that little progress had been made to date.
“Our hopes that the agreement on chemical weapons destruction would perhaps pave the way for further joint and successful efforts to de-escalate the situation have, unfortunately, not been fulfilled. On the contrary”, stated Steinmeier.
In 2013, however, the political process ran less than smoothly.
Concern about developments in Egypt
“We hope that Egypt will find a way towards democracy and the rule of law”, said Foreign Minister Steinmeier.
What is more, Germany believed it would not be good in the long term if “a large proportion of the population remains excluded from any participation or representation in political life”.
Broader basis for bilateral relations
Bild: Steinmeier and Al Attiyah greet each other at the Federal Foreign Office
The two Foreign Ministers stated that German-Qatari relations were “diverse and vibrant” but that they were dominated by economic interests at present.
Steinmeier said there was agreement that “we should extend the basis of these relations in the coming years.”
A joint German-Qatari cultural year is planned for 2017.
There was a delay of several months before a convention to draft a new constitution was elected by universal suffrage in February 2014. Its work is to be completed by autumn.
The transitional government has agreed to conduct elections before summer 2014: following a change in electoral law, there are to be fresh parliamentary and presidential elections.
The stabilisation and democratisation process remains in great peril.
There are still large quantities of small arms in circulation, and rivalry between militia groups poses a constant threat to law and order.
Investigation into the situation of foreign workers in Qatar
Steinmeier confirmed that he and his opposite number had also discussed the debate surrounding the World Cup in Qatar in 2022 as well as the treatment of foreign workers.
In the field of mine clearance, the Federal Foreign Office has supported projects to the tune of 3.5 million euros from its humanitarian aid budget to date.
He said that “positive and humane treatment” was anchored in Qatar’s constitution.
He added that the report would be submitted in the near future.
Germany has provided a million euros for this purpose so far.
Ministerial Conference on International Support to Libya – Conclusions
Germany has seconded experts to these missions.
Germany is also supporting state-building with targeted projects at the centralised and local levels.
The “One Voice” International Women’s Conference in Libya (January 2013)
Here, Libyan non-governmental organisations working to promote women also receive support.
The talks between Foreign Minister Steinmeier and his Qatari counterpart Khalid Al Attiyah in Berlin on Friday (28 March) focused on the resolution of international conflicts, for example in the Middle East and Syria.
During extensive talks in private, the two Ministers discussed a number of bilateral and international issues.
Foreign Minister Al Attiyah said it was hoped there would be a “just and fair solution on of the basis of the two-state solution.”
He went on to say that too many people were still being killed – in some cases due to military activities, in others because “they are quite simply dying of starvation”.
“That will provide a good opportunity to show people in both our countries that the economy is important but that it is not the only key factor in our bilateral relations”, stressed Steinmeier.
Foreign Minister Al Attiyah emphasised that an international corporation had been commissioned to investigate the situation.
It was also agreed that bilateral relations between Germany and Qatar should be given a broader basis.
He added that the recent conviction of hundreds of supporters of the Muslim Brotherhood was “already weighing heavily on what may lie ahead”.
I warmly congratulate him on his appointment to this key office.
Jens Stoltenberg was always committed to NATO back when he was Norwegian Prime Minister.
As an experienced diplomat, he has the qualities we need in these turbulent and difficult times:
intelligent analysis, a cooperative style of leadership and a knack for finding the right words.
Germany has made 750,000 euros available to the project.
This is one of my first speeches in my new role as Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid.
Furthermore, Germany has joined the EU in starting a capacity-building project in weapons and munitions security and storage for the 2012-2017 period.
Germany’s financial contribution comes to 2.9 million euros.
In my home town of Münster they say that if an event takes place for the second time in the same place and with the same objective, a tradition is born.
This is now the fourth time that we have been privileged to host the award ceremony for the European Civil Rights Prize of the Sinti and Roma.
For in my view, this civil rights prize is one of the most important awards and honours that German society and of course the Roma and Sinti themselves have to recognise commitment to their minority.
Jens Stoltenberg is the best possible choice in my view.
The Alliance is thus gaining an experienced statesman who is uniquely suited to ensuring that NATO stays in good shape and to positioning it strategically in the face of major new tasks, for example in the spheres of crisis management or cyber security.
“Stoltenberg is the best possible choice in my view”
What we are seeing at the moment is “the return of foreign policy to public debate”, as many people describe it.
Africa has changed more quickly than our perception of the continent.
At the International Libya Conference in Rome on 6 March 2014, Germany and the international community reiterated their pledge to assist in this area.
Human rights, democracy and the protection of minorities are key components of German foreign policy.
For human rights are the fertile soil and spring from which every human society emerges, which allow peace and justice to take root in the world.
The aim of German human rights policy is worldwide implementation and protection of civic, political, economic, social and cultural human rights.
At the International Libya Conference held in Rome on 6 March 2014, Foreign Minister Steinmeier announced that an additional 5 million euros would be made available for 2014, in part to be spent on a joint Franco-German programme for provisional munitions storage.
Addis Ababa is also the seat of the African Union, the AU for short.
Established in 2002, the organisation reflects Africa’s initiative in taking responsibility for the construction of a peace and security architecture for the continent.
This was the first meeting between the two Ministers at the Federal Foreign Office. They last met at the Munich Security Conference in early February 2014.
Germany is also actively involved in ensuring the security of chemical weapons.
Four million euros have been provided to fund a detonation furnace which can be used to destroy chemical weapons.
In this context we as the Federal Government, parliament and civil society are committed to promoting respect and protection for minorities – nationally and internationally.
This applies not only internationally and within Europe, but also here at home.
The European Civil Rights Prize of the Sinti and Roma is awarded in awareness of their tragic history.
Deprivation of rights, persecution and systematic destruction were the terrible fate of this minority in Nazi Europe.
But even today the situation of the Sinti and Roma in many European countries gives cause for great concern.
(...) Therefore, training, including training for security forces, is a main priority alongside traditional forms of cooperation within the scope of economic cooperation.
The consequences of societal and social exclusion, discrimination and stigmatisation are dramatic:
Moreover, in a joint project with the United States and Canada, Libya’s chemical weapons arsenal was destroyed by February 2014 using a chemical weapons destruction facility in Ruwagha which had been reconstructed with German funding.
The next day began with a delay:
Click here to read the conclusions of the International Libya Conference in Rome, 6 March 2014, on the website of the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs:
The German Foreign Minister chose a German ship to symbolise the shared history of the two countries:
Allow me to make a personal observation.
However, the new wealth has by no means reached all sections of the population.
The Special Award of the European Civil Rights Prize of the Sinti and Roma, which is being presented again this year, goes to the intercultural youth association Amaro Drom e.V.
Steinmeier took this opportunity to introduce the German business people accompanying him on his trip to the Angolan Economics Minister, Abraao Gourgel.
The fact that Luanda’s infrastructure is not yet keeping pace with the economic boom became apparent during a sudden downpour in the afternoon.
Within minutes, the streets were transformed into rushing torrents.
In my view that is the right way to encourage mutual understanding and promote equal opportunities.
Many thanks, therefore, to you, too, and congratulations on this award.
The traffic came to a halt and the delegation got stuck.
By the evening, the sun was shining again.
Unfortunately, mutual understanding and equal opportunities are not something we can take for granted.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier on the decision concerning the NATO Secretary General:
Commenting on the decision to appoint Jens Stoltenberg as the successor to Anders Fogh Rasmussen as NATO Secretary General, Foreign Minister Steinmeier said:
The European institutions, the member states and their societies all have a joint responsibility to change this.
For several years the European institutions, especially the EU, the Council of Europe and the OSCE, have focused particular attention on the situation of the Roma in Europe.
Steinmeier wanted to acquaint himself once more with this “rising continent”:
regional institutions, bilateral relations, opportunities for political and economic cooperation.
Germany wants to do more in future to help the African states.
due to a technical problem, the Minister’s government aircraft could not take off for Dar es Salaam until several hours after the scheduled time.
Germany’s financial support for Libya in the field of democratisation now totals some 4.3 million euros.
In his speech, the Minister praised the country’s economic potential and pointed out that the booming Angolan economy can only continue to grow if it is complemented by social justice.
On 4 April 2014 the European Commission will hold a European Roma summit for the third time.
However, that is not enough.
Day after day we see how states trample on human rights and human dignity.
These are not isolated incidents.
On the contrary, we are observing systematic abuse of international human rights standards.
Dear prizewinners,
I would like to thank you once again for your commitment to promoting the rights of minorities.
Congratulations on your achievement!
Report on cooperation with the United Nations
United Nations flag
Engagement in the United Nations is a central pillar of German foreign policy.
On the other, Germany is campaigning hard to increase the authority and efficiency of the UN.
The report covers 2010 and 2011 and thus includes the first year of Germany’s last presidency of the Security Council.
This beautiful and honourable tradition fills me with joy, and we must be sure to uphold it.
As you can imagine, the Foreign Minister is therefore away a great deal, working on finding solutions to the current conflicts and crises in Europe.
In the Basic Law the German people pledge their commitment to inviolable and inalienable human rights.
During his visit to the presidential palace that evening, Steinmeier and President Kikwete agreed on the joint renovation of this ship. The costs are to be met by the two Governments and the private sector.
Teaser: Foreign Minister Steinmeier travels to Africa
On his first trip to Africa during his second term of office, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier travelled to Ethiopia, Tanzania and Angola.
Germany views Africa’s up-and-coming countries as partners in the efforts to solve global challenges.
This was not Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s first trip to Africa; but it was his first trip during his second term of office.
24 March 2014 – Ethiopia
In Addis Ababa, the first stop on the trip, Foreign Minister Steinmeier was welcomed by his Ethiopian counterpart, Tedros Adhanom.
He went on to meet President Mulatu at the presidential palace, where he encountered Ethiopia’s emblem – the lion – twice in one go.
O-Ton BM: I don’t believe we could have imagined even years ago that the African Union would be striving to resolve conflicts within the continent with the authority it has gained there. That makes it possible to engage in a very different level of cooperation between, for instance, the European and African Unions.
Following Steinmeier’s meeting with the AU Commission Chairperson Dlamini-Zuma, the delegation toured a further contribution by Germany to Africa’s peace and security architecture:
the new premises of the AU’s Peace and Security Department, which have been financed by the Federal Foreign Office.
25 March 2014 – Tanzania
Bilateral relations between Germany and Tanzania have a long tradition – Steinmeier spoke about this at the University of Dar es Salaam to students in a German-Tanzanian course and also with his opposite number, Bernard Membe.
O-Ton Steinmeier: I’m aware that In the eyes of many – many here in this country –the Liemba, which has been tirelessly ferrying people across Lake Tanganyika for almost 100 years, stands more than anything else for this shared history and has become a symbol of German-Tanzanian friendship.
26 March 2014 – Angola
Thanks to its large reserves of raw materials, Angola – the last stop on Steinmeier’s trip – has one of the world’s highest growth rates.
In the capital Luanda, new construction projects can be seen everywhere – for example, the new seafront promenade.
The German-Angolan Economic Forum serves as a contact point for business people from both countries.
The new AU building in Ethiopia, the renovation of the Liemba in Tanzania and the sight of the many construction sites in Angola:
these impressions stand for the rising continent which the German Foreign Minister experienced during his three-day trip to Africa.
Steinmeier himself said that Africa’s great dynamism was more apparent to him than ever before during this visit.
The Federal Republic of Germany has signed almost all important international human rights agreements and treaties at United Nations level, as well as in Europe and within the context of the Council of Europe, as is only right and proper.
The Central Council of German Sinti and Roma is constantly working to alleviate these problems and is playing a key role in improving the situation of Sinti and Roma.
It is in no small part down to you that Sinti and Roma are now one of the four recognised national minorities in Germany.
The fact that opinions differ in one or two areas can only be a good thing.
Your organisation does not stand on the fringes but is active within society promoting intercultural exchange between young people in Germany with different backgrounds.
For in many countries in Europe Roma continue to live in very difficult conditions on the margins of society.
Yet as long as EU citizens live without prospects in the poorest conditions and excluded from the majority society, the European Union is not respecting the values it claims to represent.
There is still much to do, and further political effort is needed.
In June 2013 the European Commission, in its communication on steps forward in implementing national integration strategies, came to the conclusion that the measures and changes implemented in the member states so far were insufficient.
It stated that racism towards and discrimination against Roma, particularly in their countries of origin, were still prevalent in all member states.
Representatives of governments, parliaments and civil societies will consider the question of how to integrate Roma socially and economically at a local level and how to optimise use of the EU funds available for these purposes.
In a series of Council of Europe programmes implemented in cooperation with the EU, Germany is working consistently to dovetail the efforts of EU and the Council of Europe even more effectively and to make the most of the synergies this generates to further improve integration of Sinti and Roma in Europe.
Many people are still regularly victims of racism and xenophobia, both at home and abroad.
It is therefore all the more important that we keep the issue of human rights in the public eye and frequently spark new debates – that is the task of national and international policymakers.
And that is another reason why the importance of the European Civil Rights Prize of the Sinti and Roma cannot be overestimated.
German Government report on cooperation between the Federal Republic of Germany and the United Nations and individual international organisations and institutions working globally within the UN System in 2010 and 2011 PDF | 1 MB (in German)
Given its unique legitimacy, the UN plays a decisive role in creating and further developing the shared values and norms which guide the actions of states and non-state players internationally.
A report compiled by the Federal Government every two years provides an insight into Germany’s many different activities within the UN system.
The last report was adopted by the Cabinet in August 2012. The next one is due in summer 2014.
Germany’s involvement in the United Nations is broad-based.
On the one hand, Germany pursues many of its foreign policy goals in the United Nations and with the individual organisations that make up the UN system.
Multi-faceted German engagement
The report adopted by the Cabinet presents the multi-faceted engagement of the German Government all across the UN system and highlights its contributions to the UN’s tasks – above all in the spheres of peacekeeping, sustainable development, human rights and humanitarian aid.
Germany was a non-permanent member of the UN-Security Council for the years 2011-2012.
The Security Council is the only UN body that can take decisions which are binding under international law. It bears primary responsibility for maintaining international peace and security.
Teaser: Following the end of the Cold War, NATO has been changing to meet the security policy challenges of our time.
In our interconnected world conflicts cannot be resolved by any one country alone.
We are dependent on partners and alliances.
Adapting NATO to meet new challenges
In order to fulfil its duty to protect the citizens of its member states, NATO prepares itself to face new security challenges in an ongoing process.
The Strategic Concept adopted at the Lisbon Summit in 2010 provides the political benchmarks for this.
In the document entitled “Active engagement, modern defence”, three core NATO functions are set forth: collective defence, crisis management and cooperative security.
In extension of the previous deterrence and defence doctrine, prevention and resilience are to the fore when it comes to tackling the new security challenges.
The main priorities in this connection are the spheres of cyber security, the exploration of measures aimed at helping to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and protection against attacks with weapons of mass destruction, as well as the fight against terrorism.
Clear signals for disarmament and arms control
NATO is also sending clear messages with regard to the global disarmament and arms control efforts.
Collective and smart defence
The Strategic Concept underscores the importance of the mutual defence obligation under Article 5 of the Washington Treaty as the Alliance’s core function.
In financially straitened times, it is crucial to ensure that defence budget cuts do not diminish the Alliance’s security.
Essentially, this is about determining which military capabilities each Alliance partner has to provide for themselves and which can be provided by one or more partners for the entire Alliance.
Furthermore, more military equipment should also be procured on a multinational basis.
These initiatives partly complement each other in terms of content with a view to adapting the Alliance to deal with the challenges up to 2020 and beyond.
NATO will gradually develop its own air defence system in a way that also ensures missile defence.
Alliance solidarity with Turkey
The North Atlantic Council at Foreign Minister level complied with this request with its decision of 4 December 2012.
Germany’s support for Turkey is part of NATO’s integrated air defence.
Strengthening NATO’s integrated air defence in Turkey is a purely defensive measure intended to prevent the conflict in Syria from spreading to Turkey.
Military operations and crisis management
The most visible sign of NATO’s activity in the sphere of crisis management is its operations.
One important topic of the last few years is the Alliance’s engagement in Afghanistan.
NATO and its partners want to withdraw their combat troops from the country by the end of 2014.
The Alliance is currently carrying out the following operations:
At present 47 countries are taking part, with a total of around 53,000 troops.
The mandate will run until 31 January 2014.
NATO is not just a defence alliance. Rather, it is increasingly becoming a security alliance.
At present, NATO has partnerships with more than 40 states and international organisations.
In view of the changed security environment and new challenges, the network of countries and international organisations with which NATO is engaged in political dialogue is to be broadened, and concrete cooperation with Alliance partners intensified.
Partners across the globe (bilateral cooperation programmes with Australia, Japan, Korea, New Zealand, Mongolia, Afghanistan, Pakistan and Iraq; these programmes have been grouped under this format since 2010)
Also outside of these institutional formats, using flexible formats, the Alliance is able to maintain an exchange with other countries which contribute to Alliance operations and missions politically, militarily or logistically, or which express an interest in consultation meetings with NATO.
The German Government strongly supports NATO’s new, further evolved partnership policy, which focuses on the needs of the partners without losing sight of the Alliance’s legitimate interests.
Istanbul Cooperation Initiative
Partners across the globe
Today, the following states are members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (also known as the North Atlantic Alliance or NATO): Albania, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Turkey, the United Kingdom and the United States.
Mediterranean Dialogue
Guardi’s “Palace Stairs” returns to Warsaw
Shaping the future together
“Palace Stairs” returns to Warsaw
The piece, by Italian rococo artist Francesco Guardi, depicts the stairs leading up to the Doge’s palace in Venice.
It was stolen from the National Museum in Warsaw by the Nazis in 1939 and brought to Germany from there.
“Palace Stairs” by Francesco Guardi
“Palace Stairs” was among the ‘first choice’ range of paintings which were to be offered to Hitler for his Führer Museum in Linz.
From the Central Collecting Point in Wiesbaden, it then found its way via Munich and Heidelberg to Stuttgart.
Not until many years after the war could its provenance be established beyond any doubt.
Steinmeier emphasised that he was presenting his counterpart with this painting “with a sense of responsibility as regards the difficult history that connects our two countries and the unresolved issues that still mark our relations in spite of our established friendship”.
Left to right: Pleuger, Kowalski, Sikorski, Steinmeier and Walter
Steinmeier, Fabius and Sikorski discussing Europe with students
Symbol of trust
A symbol of mutual trust:
They both described the restitution of Guardi’s “Palace Stairs” as “a symbol of trust”.
North Atlantic Alliance (NATO)
The North Atlantic Alliance (NATO) therefore remains a central anchor of our defence and security policy.
With 28 members at present, NATO makes a crucial contribution towards security and stability in the Euro-Atlantic area.
Bild: Group photo with Chancellor Merkel and Afghanistan’s President Karzai
This is emphasised in the Strategic Concept by the commitment to the goal of a world without nuclear weapons and the establishment of a committee to provide advice on WMD control and disarmament.
The NATO Deterrence and Defense Posture Review (DDPR) adopted in Chicago in 2012 expressly spells out the importance of disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation to the Alliance’s security.
Against this background, the NATO Secretary-General’s Smart Defence Initiative is aimed at prioritising military capabilities in line with their actual significance.
At the NATO Summit in Chicago in 2012, the Heads of State and Government also agreed on the Connected Forces Initiative, which is aimed at improving cooperation among NATO armed forces and with partners.
NATO website on Smart Defence
At the NATO Summit in Lisbon (November 2010), the Alliance Heads of State and Government made the fundamental decision to develop a NATO missile defence capability as a core task within the framework of collective Alliance defence, in order to ensure that the population and territory of the Alliance are protected as well as possible.
The political decision made in Lisbon was rendered more concrete by the declaration on an interim capability at the NATO Summit in Chicago (May 2012).
The Active Fence mission in Turkey (since late 2012) is a tangible manifestation of Alliance solidarity: following consultations in the North Atlantic Council in June and October 2012 on the basis of Article 4 of the North Atlantic Treaty, on 21 November 2012 Turkey requested the Alliance to support it by deploying the PATRIOT air defence missile system to its territory.
Ten days later, the German Bundestag approved the mandate to deploy two Bundeswehr PATRIOT systems to Turkey.
The current Bundestag mandate will remain in force until the end of January 2015.
In a difficult situation for Turkey, the deployment of German PATRIOT systems to Turkey in collaboration with the Netherlands and the US demonstrates that Germany is a reliable Alliance partner.
After that, a new, much smaller non-combat mission is to continue providing support for Afghan security forces through training, advisory services and other forms of assistance.
Germany declared at the NATO Summit in Chicago that after 2014 it will provide annual funding of around 150 million euros to help maintain the Afghan National Security Forces.
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF):
NATO took over the UN-mandated ISAF mission in Afghanistan in 2003.
With approximately 3000 soldiers Germany is the third-largest troop contributor (as of March 2014).
Kosovo Force (KFOR) has been in Kosovo since 1999.
At present 31 nations (including all NATO members except Belgium, Iceland, Latvia, Lithuania, Slovakia and Spain) are taking part, with a total of around 5000 troops.
With approximately 700 soldiers Germany is the largest troop contributor along with the US (as of March 2014).
Operation Active Endeavor (OAE): OAE is the NATO counterterrorism mission in the Mediterranean and was established following the attacks of 11 September 2001.
Germany’s contribution includes ships which cross the Mediterranean to or from the counter-piracy mission ATALANTA or to combat weapons smuggling within the scope of UNIFIL, ships for the Standing NATO Maritime Groups (SNMGs) as well as ORION maritime patrol aircraft and crews for NATO AWACS aircraft.
Operation Ocean Shield (OOS): Within the framework of OOS, NATO accompanies trading ships off the Horn of Africa and, when necessary, rescues captured ships.
Operation Ocean Shield is working to develop local capabilities to combat piracy within the framework of UN-coordinated cooperation and in close coordination with all other players in the region, especially the EU ATALANTA mission.
Germany is participating in the EU-led ATALANTA mission but not in the OOS operation.
Active Fence (Turkey): Germany is contributing up to 400 soldiers to help boost NATO’s integrated air defence on the Turkish-Syrian border.
The US and the Netherlands also intend to station a number of PATRIOT batteries in Turkey (c.f. also “Alliance solidarity with Turkey”).
Partnerships, i.e. cooperation with countries which are not NATO members, is therefore of growing importance.
Long-standing institutionalised partnerships include:
The Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council (EAPC) as well as its predecessor format, since 1992 (OSCE area)
Mediterranean Dialogue (MD), since 1994
Istanbul Cooperation Initiative (ICI), since 2004
NATO also has special forms of cooperation with Russia, Ukraine and Georgia in the shape of the NATO-Russia Council (since 1997), the NATO-Ukraine Commission (since 1997) and the NATO-Georgia Commission (since 2008).
To this end, the NATO Foreign Ministers adopted a new partnership policy for the Alliance at their meeting in Berlin in April 2011, which was intended to make cooperation with other states and organisations more efficient, pragmatic and flexible.
Germany also remains committed to NATO’s “open-door policy”.
However, the accession to NATO by more states would require further reform efforts in the countries interested in joining NATO and would have to represent an added value to Euro-Atlantic security.
Within the framework of cooperative security, NATO is also working to achieve worldwide disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation.
This includes individual measures such as Trust Funds to secure ammunition depots, to destroy military salvage or clear mines as well as political support for international efforts to bring about an effective non-proliferation policy and reduce the nuclear weapons arsenals.
In particular, the NATO-Russia Council with its numerous sub-committees offers a suitable framework for transparency measures as a prerequisite for the start of the relevant negotiations.
Information on the NATO website on the partnerships with non-NATO states
NATO-Russia Council website
NATO-Ukraine Commission
NATO-Georgia Commission
Basic Document of NATO’s Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council (EPAC)
On 4 April 1949, twelve states from Europe and North America signed the North Atlantic Treaty in Washington, DC.
The talks between Germany and Poland on the repatriation of cultural property confiscated, looted or otherwise removed during the Second World War began in 1992 and were then interrupted for several years.
In the morning Steinmeier had already commented on this as follows:
We have learned to transcend borders and think things through together.
We intend to unite our efforts and strive actively for Europe and peace in Europe.
Other issues discussed were Europe and the euro as well as the creation of a single European gas market.
Meeting in Weimar
At the hand-over, Foreign Minister Steinmeier expressed astonishment that such a “small, unassuming painting” should have travelled so far.
Foreign Minister Sikorski said he was glad that this great work of art was returning to its rightful owner, the National Museum in Warsaw.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier handed over a painting to Poland’s Foreign Minister Radosław Sikorski today (31 March), which was looted from the National Museum in Warsaw during the Second World War.
Steinmeier and Sikorski at the hand-over
Foreign Minister Steinmeier handed over a painting to Poland’s Foreign Minister Radosław Sikorski today (31 March), which was looted from the National Museum in Warsaw and brought to Germany during the Second World War.
A 75-year odyssey
Now, after a 75-year odyssey, “Palace Stairs” is going back to the National Museum in Warsaw.
He also expressed the hope that this painting would serve as a signal to breathe new life into the German-Polish dialogue on questions of cultural property, which had lost momentum.
Advancing the German-Polish dialogue on cultural property
Poland, he reported, had lost around half a million works of art in the Second World War, of which several dozen have been returned since 1990 – such as the Lucas Cranach which went to the Breslauer Sammlung.
“Every act of restitution helps to deepen our mutual trust and underpins our ongoing dialogue”, Sikorski said.
State Secretary Jürgen Walter of the Baden-Württemberg Ministry of Science, Research and the Arts was also present for the hand-over, as were the two lead negotiators in the German-Polish dialogue on cultural property, former State Secretary Gunter Pleuger and Wojciech Kowalski.
Even before that hand-over itself, the two Foreign Ministers were saying how pleased they were for this significant piece to be returning to Poland, to the National Museum in Warsaw, after 75 years.
They called the restitution a “symbolic expression of mutual trust” that would provide fresh momentum for the committed continuation of the German-Polish dialogue on cultural property.
They were relaunched in summer 2012, led by former State Secretary Gunter Pleuger and Wojciech Kowalski.
At civil society level, too, there are an increasing number of initiatives in this format.
Working together to prevent a new division of Europe
Their main focus here will be the situation in Ukraine and Russia.
Their current meeting is intended to generate momentum on various European and foreign policy issues and explore new ways to make the most of the Weimar Triangle format.
Steinmeier had repeatedly emphasised that in view of the Crimean crisis and future relations with Russia the three ministers were working together to prevent “a new division of Europe”.
More on the Weimar Triangle
On Tuesday (1 April) and Wednesday (2 April) Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier will attend the meeting of NATO foreign ministers in Brussels.
The main focus of the meeting with his counterparts from other NATO member countries will be the implications of the Crimean crisis for the Alliance, support for Ukraine and what line to take in future towards Russia.
The main focus is the situation in Ukraine and what line to take with Russia.
Combating terrorism with the Global Counterterrorism Forum
At first the discussion revolved around the Crimean crisis and relations with Ukraine and Russia.
Asked by a young woman student about Germany's position on Ukraine, Steinmeier emphasised that what was crucial now was to make sure “that other parts of Ukraine do not come under Russian control and are not annexed by Russia.
French, Polish and German flags in front of Weimar City Hall
At a reception with young people involved in Franco-German-Polish projects the three ministers discovered what a broad spectrum this trilateral cooperation covers at the level of civil society.
Today heads of state and government as well as ministers with responsibility for particular aspects of government policy meet regularly under Weimar Triangle auspices.
In Weimar the three foreign ministers will also have the opportunity to discuss current issues on the political agenda as well as new joint initiatives.
On Monday and Tuesday morning the three “Weimar Triangle” foreign ministers of Germany, France and Poland had met for talks in the city.
The main focus of their discussions had been how to respond to the Crimean crisis.
The Global Counterterrorism Forum (GCTF) is an informal, multilateral forum established at the initiative of the United States in September 2011. Its objective is to combat terrorism, particularly by developing and strengthening civilian capacities and institutions which underpin the rule of law.
The fight against drugs
The GCTF’s work consists primarily of developing and sharing best practices as well as assisting and coordinating steps to enhance civilian capacities as part of international anti-terrorism efforts.
Solidarity without any ifs or buts
Teasertext: Only by pooling international efforts can the global dimension of the drugs problem be tackled successfully.
Within the framework of the United Nations, the EU as well as in other international bodies, Germany is promoting the fight against drug trafficking and drug abuse.
The spring meeting of NATO foreign ministers will likewise be dominated by the Crimean crisis.
Bild: The fight against drugs in Afghanistan
The fight against drugs as an ongoing major challenge
In some regions, drugs money is possibly also being used to finance terrorism.
Furthermore, drug abuse poses a serious threat to public health in every country in the world.
At international level, Germany’s policy is aimed at reducing the quantity of drugs available while lowering demand for them.
The most recent meeting of the Coordinating Committee was held in New York in September 2013, alongside a meeting of the Foreign Ministers.
The Foreign Ministers meeting in December 2012 served as an opportunity to open Hedayah, an International Center of Excellence for Countering Violent Extremist, in Abu Dhabi.
Cooperation among donor states, emerging economies and developing countries is of vital importance here: the drug problem affects everyone and poses a threat to us all.
The so-called North Atlantic Council will then deliberate in depth on the future shape of relations with Russia and Ukraine.
The internal organisation of the GCTF is as follows. The Coordinating Committee is the strategic steering body, and five Working Groups cover two subject areas (Countering Violent Extremism, and Criminal Justice and the Rule of Law) and three geographical regions (the Sahel, the Horn of Africa and Southeast Asia).
Hedayah is intended to bring together specialists, expertise and experience to combat violent extremism through training programmes, informed dialogue and practical cooperation.
Cooperation within the United Nations
The establishment of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs (CND) in 1946 created a central agency for drug-related issues. The Commission convenes once a year and draws up guidelines for cooperation within the United Nations.
The Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 anchored the fight against drugs in international law, and was further refined by the drug control conventions of 1971 and 1988.
In these conventions, states undertake to control the production of and trade in narcotic drugs, reduce demand, combat drug abuse and illicit drug trafficking, create the requisite institutions to enable them to do so and report on such action to the relevant international bodies.
What is at stake in the Crimean crisis is also solidarity within the Alliance.
Compliance is monitored by the International Narcotics Control Board (INCB).
Nevertheless, the German Government regards the Political Declaration and the Plan of Action of March 2009 as a suitable basis for international cooperation on drug policy in the coming years.
The fight against drugs in the European Union
In addition to bilateral and multilateral cooperation, for example cooperation among police forces, the collaboration within the European Union plays an increasingly important role.
Based on the EU Drugs Strategy 2013-2020 and the 2013-2016 EU Drug Action Plan, which is being drawn up at present and contains detailed measures, an enhanced fight against drugs in Europe and the world is being pursued in the spheres of supply and demand reduction, international cooperation, information and evaluation.
Efforts to combat drugs in the European Union are aimed at reducing drug consumption, as well as the social and health problems it causes.
The success of each measure is examined in order to guarantee realistic political goals.
Problems and challenges
The increasing prevalence of synthetic drugs, the limited monitoring of distribution channels and the use of chemical precursors are problematic.
The high level of corruption and the lack of economic alternatives for sections of the population represent huge challenges in many drug producing and transit countries.
According to UNODC, it has been possible to contain the long-term growth of the illegal narcotics industry.
However, this progress is at risk due to the emergence of new drug markets, especially in developing countries, and the opening of new trafficking routes, particularly in Africa.
Further efforts are necessary in order to avoid setbacks and further contain the narcotics industry.
The negative impact of drug abuse on public health, prosperity and safety pose a threat to the entire international community.
Germany’s goals for the future
As one of the main donors to the fight against drugs in the United Nations, Germany – together with its partners in the European Union – wants to create a balanced strategy to combat drugs.
This includes more measures aimed at reducing demand and at improving public health.
The main focus of Germany’s activities is on projects designed to foster alternative development, police cooperation and the establishment of institutions in Afghanistan, the Andean states and increasingly in Africa, especially in West Africa.
In Germany, the aim is to further reduce demand, which has been falling for many years now.
Globally, repressive measures against drug cultivation and trafficking alone cannot help. Rather, viable alternatives to the narcotics industry in developing countries and emerging economies must be found, for people in these countries must have other means of earning an adequate living.
Furthermore, Germany is working to create and strengthen functioning state structures in order to ensure the sustainability of positive developments.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier has warned of the importance of a level-headed approach in this connection.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier holds talks in Weimar with his French and Polish counterparts, Fabius and Sikorski.
striving actively for Europe
Today (31 March) and tomorrow the Polish, French and German foreign ministers, Radosław Sikorski, Laurent Fabius and Frank-Walter Steinmeier, are meeting in Berlin and Weimar.
In a Joint Statement on Ukraine the foreign ministers expressed their concern about the ongoing crisis. They presented a set of joint proposals on how the alliance should respond to the Crimean crisis, which they plan to submit to tomorrow's meeting of NATO foreign ministers.
At the start of their “Weimar meeting” Steinmeier, Fabius and Sikorski took part in a discussion in Berlin.
That's why we're seeking above all through political and diplomatic dialogue to get the overall situation (...) moving in a direction where hopefully the high point of escalation will be behind us”, he continued.
Another topic discussed was the cooperation between Germany, France and Poland under Weimar Triangle auspices.
The Weimar Triangle demonstrates how countries with different histories can join forces to shape the future.
European enlargement, the European Neighbourhood Policy and the consequences of the NSA affair were also topics of debate.
After the discussion in Berlin the three foreign ministers left for Weimar, the city after which the dialogue format was named in 1991.
During the 1990s this trilateral cooperation was further expanded.
Weimar Triangle foreign ministers arriving at the official seat of President Yanukovych
In long and tough negotiations in Kyiv on 20 and 21 February Steinmeier, Sikorski and Fabius had managed to end the bloody conflict in Ukraine.
In the evening the three ministers finalised a Joint Statement on Ukraine expressing their concern over persistent tensions and reaffirming their desire to continue fostering “the spirit of 21 February”.
Ahead of the meeting with his French and Polish counterparts he had pointed out that the three ministers had been “sending Ukraine clear messages regarding Russian policy”.
Steinmeier also stressed that Eastern neighbours would not be pressured into any “either-or choices”.
The three foreign ministers being welcomed by Minister-President Lieberknecht and Mayor Wolf
Text of the Joint Statement on Ukraine of the Weimar Triangle Foreign Ministers Frank-Walter Steinmeier (Germany), Laurent Fabius (France), and Radoslaw Sikorski (Poland) in Weimar.
At the end of their talks in Weimar on Tuesday, Steinmeier, Sikorski and Fabius will travel together to Brussels, where on Tuesday and Wednesday (1 and 2 April) they will attend a meeting of NATO foreign ministers.
The GCTF is in principle open to others wishing to join and strives to cooperate with the UN and other multilateral and regional organisations and institutions.
There are two things that are important right now.
NATO emblem
Continued support for Afghanistan in the post-2014 period will also be a topic of discussion.
One important organisation in the fight against drugs is the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), based in Vienna, which coordinates all drug-related activities by the UN, plans, implements projects and publishes reports.
In particular, the link to organised crime and the destabilisation of entire states makes illegal drugs a serious problem.
German and European ideas could not be fully realised in all areas of drug policy.
At the spring meeting of NATO foreign ministers in Brussels on 1 and 2 April the main focus will be the Crimean crisis, relations with Russia and support for Ukraine.
The foreign ministers had adopted a Joint Statement in this connection.
It will be the subject of an initial discussion on Tuesday afternoon between all 28 NATO member countries.
Importance of a level-headed approach in the Crimean crisis
Ahead of the NATO meeting Steinmeier had explained at the weekend to a journalist from a German weekly:
In what is, for NATO especially, an extraordinarily difficult situation we must act with a cool head and not let ourselves be rushed into any spiralling military escalation.
At the same time our partners within the alliance know they can count on our solidarity without any ifs or buts and not only when the going is good.
Another topic on the NATO foreign ministers’ agenda will be preparations for the NATO summit in autumn 2014, which will be concerned with NATO’s future direction as a security policy organisation as well as a strategic alliance.
The main focus here will be the consequences of the presidential elections to be held in Afghanistan on 5 April.
The Istanbul Initiative is a NATO partnership format, its members include Kuwait, Qatar, Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates.
On Tuesday Steinmeier will travel to Brussels for the spring NATO foreign ministers meeting in the company of his French and Polish counterparts, Laurent Fabius and Radek Sikorski, after joint deliberations in the Thuringian city of Weimar.
This will be followed by a meeting of the NATO-Ukraine Commission, whose discussions will focus on support for the Alliance's partner of long standing.
Recently this has been discussed particularly in the context of NATO's presence along the Alliance's external borders in the Baltic states.
The Federal Foreign Office has been assisting the African Union Border Programme (AUBP) with capacity-building since 2009, and is thus making an important contribution to civilian crisis prevention in Africa.
The Federal Foreign Office has been assisting the African Union Border Programme (AUBP) with capacity-building since 2009, and is thus making an important contribution to civilian crisis prevention in Africa.
Ambassador Cyrus presents documents to AU Commissioner Lamamra
“From Barriers to Bridges” is the goal of the AUBP, which focuses on resolving border issues on the African continent.
The borders between many countries are not adequately delimited (legally defined) and demarcated (physically identified), which has led to recurring crises and conflicts over many decades.
The ceremony in Addis Ababa is attended by representatives of the AU Commission, ambassadors from the AU member countries, representatives of the EU and African regional organisations and members of the diplomatic corps.
Historical documents support demarcation
The highlight of African Border Day on 7 June 2013 was the presentation of copies of all the official historical documents about Africa’s borders available in German archives.
The German Ambassador to Ethiopia, Lieselore Cyrus, handed them over to the African Union (AU) Commissioner for Peace and Security at the time, Ramtane Lamamra, in a special ceremony.
In her speech, Ms Cyrus emphasised the significance of the project:
Borders are a priority for peace and security.
This is why Germany has been assisting the AUBP since 2009 in making swift progress in demarcation, extending the approximately 35% of borders which are currently legally defined.
This will be made available to the AU member states to help them resolve their border issues.
On 29 November 2013 France also officially handed over its border treaties from the colonial period to the AU Commission.
The eleven states currently involved in the AUBP and the AU are also receiving help to develop structures to facilitate cross-border cooperation, as well as assistance with delimitation and demarcation.
To this end capacity is being expanded not only in the member states themselves, but also in their organisations, institutions and service providers.
The United Nations (UN) and the fight against terrorism
Leading role for the United Nations
Germany sees the United Nations (UN) as the central forum for combating international terrorism.
This became particularly clear following the attacks on 11 September 2001, when the UN General Assembly reacted immediately with a Resolution adopted by consensus, which condemned the attacks and called for preventive and repressive counter-terrorism measures.
International cooperation in this area now has a legally binding basis in the form of 14 UN counter-terrorism conventions, all of which Germany has ratified.
Another instrument in the fight against international terrorism are the UN Security Council Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committees.
The UN sanctions regime for preventing terrorism is regularly updated, most recently in December 2012.
The UN Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
Arrival in Weimar:
The Foreign Ministers of Poland, Germany and France.
The Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy adopted by the 60th session of the UN General Assembly in 2006, as well as the corresponding Plan of Action, provide a common strategic framework for the activities of UN member states in the counter-terrorism sphere.
In the centre Minister‑President Lieberknecht, on the right Mayor Wolf.
Yesterday and today (1 April) the Polish, French and German foreign ministers, Radosław Sikorski, Laurent Fabius and Frank‑Walter Steinmeier, met in Berlin and Weimar.
Tentative sign of de‑escalation?
That's why we're seeking above all through political and diplomatic dialogue to get the overall situation (...) moving in a direction where hopefully the high point of escalation will be behind us”, he continued.
Steinmeier described news of a slight reduction in Russian troop concentrations along the border with Ukraine as “a tentative sign of de‑escalation”.
Working session of the Weimar Triangle Foreign Ministers in Weimar Castle
A Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy review conference is convened by the General Assembly every two years.
In the evening they were welcomed to Weimar by Thuringia’s Minister‑President Christine Lieberknecht and Mayor Stefan Wolf.
•	UN General Assembly Resolution:
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, 15 September 2008 PDF | 28 KB
The three foreign ministers being welcomed by Minister‑President Lieberknecht and Mayor Wolf
In Weimar the three foreign ministers also had the opportunity to discuss current issues on the political agenda as well as new joint initiatives.
Their main focus here was the situation in Ukraine and Russia.
•	Kofi Annan Report:
Joint Statement on Ukraine
On Monday evening the three ministers finalised a Joint Statement on Ukraine expressing their concern over persistent tensions and reaffirming their desire to continue fostering “the spirit of 21 February”.
With regard to this issue, the Joint Statement reads:
New momentum for the European Neighbourhood Policy
In a joint press conference with his two colleagues, Foreign Minister Steinmeier emphasised that cooperation within the Weimar Triangle was important for the future of Europe, as their joint mediation efforts in Ukraine demonstrated.
He added that over the next few days the aim would be to get Russia and the Ukraine to the table for a first round of bilateral talks.
He went on to say that together, they intended to strive to inject new momentum into the European Neighbourhood Policy.
We have to adopt a more flexible and coherent approach towards the European Neighbourhood Policy.
But the countries must retain their freedom to decide.
Following their talks in Weimar, Steinmeier, Sikorski and Fabius travelled on to Brussels together, where they are attending a meeting of NATO foreign ministers on 1 and 2 April.
In this statement, Steinmeier, Sikorski and Fabius also stressed their support for a joint three-stage approach from the alliance in the Crimea crisis.
It makes no sense to force countries into an either/or decision – the history and geography of these countries does not allow that.
Together, we want to offer them ideas on which to base their decision.
The drug problem is one of the major challenges facing the international community. The annual turnover in the global narcotics industry is estimated to be 320 billion US dollars.
Meeting of the NATO-Ukraine Commission
On the first day of their spring meeting the 28 foreign ministers discussed the implications of the Crimean crisis in the so-called North Atlantic Council and the NATO-Ukraine Commission.
They also deliberated on what line to take in future towards Russia.
NATO family portrait
On Monday evening Foreign Minister Steinmeier was upbeat about the first day of the NATO foreign ministers meeting.
The focus of their talks under Weimar Triangle auspices was the importance of a strong Union and peace in Europe.
The future of Ukraine and relations with Russia were among the main issues discussed.
He said the fact that the OSCE observer mission had now begun its work there was a small sign that tensions had eased slightly.
Our offer to cooperate with the countries in the Eastern Partnership will remain high on the agenda.
With regard to the Joint Statement by the Weimar Triangle, the German Foreign Minister underlined:
Participants at the 2nd Tana High Level Forum in 2013
Meeting in difficult times
Prior to the North Atlantic Council meeting Steinmeier had emphasised that it was taking place “in difficult times”.
German escort for destruction of Syrian chemical weapons
This was also the venue of the first two conferences in 2012 and 2013, which focused on state fragility and organised crime.
Inspired by the Munich Security Conference
Even though the world’s eyes are currently focused on Ukraine, we cannot afford to disregard other conflicts.
The civil war in Syria continues unabated.
The similarity between the two events is no coincidence. It is hoped that the model which has proved its worth in Germany over 50 years will also be successful in Africa.
The sooner the chemical weapons are destroyed, the better, so that they no longer pose a danger to the people in Syria.
It is part of our international responsibility to assist in this task.
I hope there will be widespread support for this in the German Bundestag.
The conference is organised by the Institute for Peace And Security Studies (IPSS) of Addis Ababa University.
The Federal Foreign Office provided funding for capacity-building within the IPSS from 2011 to 2013 through the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH.
Developing police forces and rule of law
Police training in Afghanistan
Promoting the rule of law is a key factor in securing peace and development worldwide.
The 3rd African security conference – officially known as the Tana High-Level Forum on Security in Africa – is to be held in Ethiopia on 26 and 27 April 2014.
In previous years, the Forum has brought together leaders from government, civil society, business, academia and the media to discuss security and organised crime in an informal setting.
German support for African security conference
The technological preparations for this are under way.
Peace and stability can only be sustainably re-established after violent conflicts through inclusive political processes and properly functioning rule of law structures.
The Federal Foreign Office has provided funding for the event.
Speech by Christoph Strässer, Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid, at the award ceremony for the European Civil Rights Prize of the Sinti and Roma at the Federal Foreign Office on 27 March 2014
Dr Peritore, Mr Zülch, Members of Amaro Drom, Mr Rose, Mr Lautenschläger, Vice-President of the German Bundestag, Colleagues from the German Bundestag. Excellencies, members of the Diplomatic Corps, Ladies and gentlemen, guests,
I am very moved and proud to be able to welcome you to the Federal Foreign Office today.
Many thanks to you, Mr Rose, and to the Manfred Lautenschläger Foundation, for making it possible for this award to be presented here today.
I would like to take this opportunity to express my sincere greetings to the prizewinners, Mr Tilman Zülch and the members of the youth organisation Amaro Drom e.V., and to congratulate them on this prestigious award.
I would also like to pass on the congratulations of Foreign Minister Steinmeier, who is unfortunately unable to be with us today.
In this day and age we need an active foreign policy, that is why I am here to congratulate you on behalf of Dr Steinmeier.
I regard this as our duty.
It is our joint obligation to take a decisive stand against all forms of discrimination, whether for reasons of ethnic origin, gender, religion or sexual identity.
At this point I would like to thank the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma and its Chairman, Romani Rose, for its considerable dedication and important commitment to equal opportunities, integration and tolerance.
Dear Mr Zülch, since the founding of the Society for Threatened Peoples you have worked to promote the rights of minorities throughout the world. Humanity and the energetic defence of human rights have always been at the heart of your activity.
I have been active for 35 years now in the area of human rights policy.
I cannot imagine what German human rights activity would look like without you, Mr Zülch.
I would therefore like to express my personal thanks to you.
The Association’s work helps children and young people grow into critical, responsible citizens equipped to lead a life fully integrated into society.
I can well remember a session of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe in which former prizewinner Thomas Hammerberg appealed very urgently to national responsibilities with regard to the situation of the Roma and Sinti.
Many of the consequences which Mr Hammerberg called for then have still not been implemented.
The reasons for this are manifold: a lack of national – political and financial – commitment, failure to utilise available EU funds, failure to dovetail local, regional, national and international projects, the lack of an integrated approach to reducing poverty and illiteracy and to health care, as well as greatly fragmented representation of interests among the Roma and failure to reach the most important target groups – mothers and children.
I hope that this summit will give crucial impetus to our future work. We all need to strive to achieve this goal.
International protection of human rights is not only an integral part of international law, it has also been largely codified.
We must therefore repeat our calls for the observance of human rights daily and take concrete steps to implement them.
You are playing an instrumental role in improving our co-existence in a modern society, making it more tolerant and just. You are also injecting vital momentum into shaping German policy both domestically and internationally.
A well-trained police force operating under the rule of law, an impartial legal system, a properly functioning public administration, legally as well as practically enforceable individual rights – all of these are central.
As a result, the IPSS is in a position to function on its own as the Tana Forum’s secretariat.
However, we are making progress in shipping out chemical weapons from Syria.
At the weekend Steinmeier had explained to a German weekly that Germany was committed to “alliance solidarity without any ifs and buts”.
He had pointed out, however, that two things were crucial “in this extraordinarily difficult situation”.
NATO needed to “act with a cool head” and not let the alliance “be rushed into any spiralling military escalation”.
In Brussels NATO foreign ministers agreed to step up the alliance's aerial and maritime surveillance activities in the Baltic Sea region.
Most serious conflict in decades
Steinmeier warned that the Crimean crisis was “the most serious conflict we’ve seen in years, in decades”.
Speaking at the end of the discussions, Steinmeier noted that the alliance’s future relations with Russia would depend above all on Russia itself.
We also want to be involved in protecting the chemical weapons destruction process on the high seas in the Mediterranean.
Today, subject to the approval of the German Bundestag, the Cabinet decided to provide a further substantial contribution to the process of destroying Syria’s chemical weapons.
The Federal Government is prepared to participate in an international operation to provide military protection for the US ship Cape Ray, on which Syrian chemical weapons are to be neutralised in a process known as hydrolysis.
That would also depend, for example, on whether announcements of Russian troop withdrawals from areas along the border with Ukraine were followed by corresponding action.
Stepping up support for Ukraine
The basis for the planned operation is a UN Security Council resolution which appeals to the UN member states to support the UN and OPCW-led mission to destroy Syria’s chemical weapons.
Rule of law promotion is also central to the activities of the United Nations (UN).
The implementation of the Millennium Declaration, which includes reinforcing the rule of law worldwide, remains a central concern of German Government policy.
Police development as an element in crisis prevention
In a further comment in the evening, he emphasised how important it was therefore to persevere with efforts to de-escalate the situation – including also the OSCE observer mission – even if right now a political solution was still a long way off.
It helps prevent conflicts.
The reform and development of properly functioning police structures is therefore a fundamental part of crisis prevention.
After the meeting of the NATO-Ukraine Commission on Tuesday afternoon NATO foreign ministers announced that support for Ukraine would be stepped up.
There had been a great many contributions to the discussions on the situation in Ukraine, Steinmeier noted.
The German Government’s commitment to police development is channelled primarily through international peace and police missions, as well as bilateral training and equipment aid.
The number of international peace and police missions has risen continuously in recent years.
The alliance had a duty, he stressed, to help Ukraine become a “functioning and economically viable state that is able to act effectively”.
Dengue virus:
Brazil has big plans.
Yet the dengue virus is still a problem for the country, threatening not only favelas but also visitors to Brazil.
With around 290 law enforcement officers drawn from the Federal and Länder police forces, Germany is currently involved in five UN and EU police missions as well as the bilateral German Police Project Team (GPPT) in Afghanistan.
This means that nearly two thirds of all German police officers serving in missions abroad are deployed in Afghanistan.
Aedes mosquito – carrier of dengue fever
Democracy-building/election observation
The accord also envisages the disarming of radical forces and the formation of an inclusive government for Ukraine.
“Dengue fever is a major problem in the poor districts of Rio,” the so-called favelas, laments Dr Norbert Lehman, founder of the organisation IRESO e.V.
These are ideal breeding grounds for the mosquitoes.
Democracy-building aid is provided above all to young and re-established democracies to help them develop and consolidate democratic structures.
While these steps were anything but easy, Steinmeier noted, on his last visit to Kyiv and Donetsk ten days previously his impression was that the country had now embarked on the path of reform.
Other risk factors include the poor or non-existent water sanitation in the favelas and bottles and cans lying in the streets.
Last year the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ) registered more than 180,000 cases of dengue virus infections in the state of Rio de Janeiro, and these figures are rising.
Germany was backing these efforts, he continued. That was why a group of top German officials were now on their way to Kyiv to see where an exchange of experience could be of help.
On Tuesday, the second day of the NATO foreign ministers meeting, the preparations for the NATO summit in autumn 2014 will be on the agenda.
The talks will focus on NATO’s future direction as both a security policy organisation and a strategic alliance.
International election observation helps stabilise young democracies by monitoring the preparation and conduct of elections and deterring those who might be tempted to perpetrate election fraud.
Afghan women at an election information event
The aim of election observation is to improve the conditions for conducting free and fair elections, thus enhancing confidence in the democratisation process.
At the same time, election observation is intended to help prevent manipulation before, during and after elections by overseeing and critically assessing their preparation and conduct.
To minimise the risk of dengue virus infections by the time of the Olympic Games in 2016, the Federal Foreign Office is making available around 350,000 euros to the Bernhard Nocht Institute and its partners (UFRJ and IRESO e.V.) within the context of the German biosecurity programme.
Training scientists in Brazil for the World Cup and the Olympics
International election observation highlights the international community’s interest in a country’s democratic development and is a key instrument for fostering civil and political human rights.
Election observation as a means of promoting democracy-building
For these events it prepares mosquito traps and teaching materials in Germany to train colleagues from the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro.
They learn how to catch mosquitoes and then examine them for dengue viruses.
To this end it contributes financial resources and personnel to rule of law missions under the European Security and Defence Policy.
A fan then sucks the insects into a net.
The construction of German appliances at the UFRJ took place in August.
“We have trained several academic assistants at the university.
Germany takes part in international election observation missions coordinated by the OSCE and the EU.
Election observation is never carried out on a bilateral basis.
German MPs take part in international election observation missions organised by the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly, the Council of Europe, NATO and the European Parliament.
Organisation of election observation
ZIF logo
Raising awareness and targeted eradication of the carrier mosquitoes and their breeding grounds should tackle the problem.
The virologist Schmidt-Chanasit said that the 2014 FIFA World Cup was an interim goal and make a good trial run.
German Partnership Program for Excellence in Biological and Health Security
On Tuesday (1 April) and Wednesday (2 April) Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier is attending the meeting of NATO foreign ministers in Brussels.
Mutual solidarity
Germany had also offered to made additional capacities available for this purpose, Steinmeier explained.
“Whether and (...) when we will be taken up on our offer” was at the moment still undecided, he added.
The participants in the meeting had accordingly condemned Russia’s actions in Crimea and agreed to rethink relations with Russia in this light.
In a joint statement NATO foreign ministers announced the suspension of practical cooperation with Russia – for the time being only the high-level political dialogue between NATO and Russia will continue.
It was important to keep channels of communication open for the eventuality that moves towards de-escalation should become possible.
“Whether such announced withdrawals actually take place is something that will have to be seen over the next few days,” Steinmeier continued.
On his arrival in Brussels, Steinmeier had already warned that there could be “no military solution” to the Crimean crisis.
Under the terms of this agreement, which was brokered by the foreign ministers of Germany, France and Poland and ended the bloody conflict in Kyiv, a new constitution is to be drawn up for the country.
Other topics
The project is part of the German Partnership Program for Excellence in Biological and Health Security, which is part of the G8’s “Global Partnership against the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction”.
Its task is to make a German contribution towards strengthening international civilian capacities for crisis prevention, conflict resolution and post-conflict peacebuilding.
In order to fulfil this mandate, the ZIF is, among other things, responsible for the training of civilian experts and managers for deployment in international peace and observation missions operated by the UN, OSCE and EU.
The programme is run by the Federal Foreign Office,
As a rule, only candidates who are part of the ZIF’s pool of experts – and have thus successfully completed a preparatory course – are nominated for an election observation mission.
OSCE election observation missions
More information on OSCE election observation missions
EU election observation missions The EU undertakes election observation missions in countries which do not belong to the OSCE area.
The EU Commission decides which countries have priority in consultation with the competent Council working groups and the European Parliament.
The final decision on the sending of an election observation mission is made by the EU Commissioner for External Relations on the basis of the findings of a needs assessment mission.
Their activities range from awareness-raising, through detection and diagnostics, disease monitoring and laboratory security, to networking.
The EU Commission selects and seconds the participants for EU election observation missions on the basis of the nominations put forward by the member states.
Members of an EU election observation mission must already have experience in international election observation missions.
In this way partner countries receive help to quickly recognise outbreaks of dangerous and highly contagious diseases, reduce infection and swiftly identify and eliminate the causes.
Status of the observers As a rule, the status of the election observers is set forth in an agreement between the host country and the institution organising the mission.
Moreover, the election observers undertake to comply with the rules of the seconding organisation (Code of Conduct for OSCE/ODIHR Observers, Code of Conduct for EU Election Observers).
At the spring meeting of NATO foreign ministers in Brussels on 1 and 2 April the main focus will be the Crimean crisis, relations with Russia and support for Ukraine.
In their talks with Ukrainian Foreign Minister Deshchytsia NATO members emphasised their desire to intensify cooperation with the alliance's East European partner country of long standing.
During their deliberations NATO foreign ministers emphasised also vis-à-vis the three Baltic states, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, the importance of mutual solidarity within the defence alliance.
Click here for more information on biosecurity
These stipulate that the observers must adhere to strict neutrality and refrain from expressing any opinions on the electoral process or results to the media or general public.
The findings of their observations are included in the statements and reports submitted by the election observation mission.
Furthermore, the technical and legal prerequisites for the conduct of democratic elections must be fulfilled (independent electoral commission, democratic electoral law, participation of the opposition in the election, freedom of expression and access to the media for all political parties).
Speaking today (2 April) in Brussels, Federal Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement on the Cabinet decision to participate in protecting the US hydrolysis ship on which Syrian chemical weapons are to be destroyed:
It will be possible to start destroying the chemical weapons in the foreseeable future.
The Federal Government’s decision envisages the deployment of a frigate and up to 300 German soldiers until the escort mission is completed, and until December 2014 at the latest.
Germany has to date supported the work of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) with 5 million euros for the OPCW Special Trust Fund for the Destruction of Syrian Chemical Weapons, provided further training for OPCW inspectors and flown them to Syria for inspections.
In January 2014 the Federal Government agreed to destroy residuals generated by the destruction of chemical warfare agents, which are similar to industrial waste, in Germany in an orderly and environmentally friendly manner.
International election observation gained importance as a result of the democratic transformation processes at the end of the 1980s, and is now a key instrument in Germany’s democracy-building assistance.
For election observation to be an effective instrument for promoting democracy-building, certain criteria have to be met. For example, the democratisation process must be advancing peacefully.
Election observers can only be seconded to a given country if its government has invited them in and the mission is coordinated at international level.
The ZIF was founded in April 2002 by the German Government and the Bundestag, working closely together.
Missions are headed by a member of the European Parliament and
coordinated by the Commission’s EuropAid Cooperation Office (EuropAid).
Functions of Germany’s diplomatic missions abroad The German embassies often prepare the observers for their task, for example by briefing them on the current situation and establishing contact with public figures.
Selection of election observers In Germany, the Center for International Peace Operations (Zentrum für Internationale Friedenseinsätze, ZIF) in Berlin, in coordination with the Federal Foreign Office, is responsible for selecting and nominating all election observers or candidates for election observation missions.
Key UN Security Council resolutions
Resolution 1368 for the first time identified acts of international terrorism as a threat to peace and security and recognized in this connection the right of self-defence pursuant to Article 51 of the United Nations Charter.
UN Security Council Resolution 1373 requires member states to meet a series of concrete obligations designed to combat terrorism.
The main aim is to prevent the financing of terrorism and deny shelter to perpetrators.
The Resolution also requires UN member states to report regularly to a committee established specially for this purpose, the Counter Terrorism Committee (CTC).
The Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) was established alongside the CTC to support UN member countries in implementing Resolution 1373.
These Committees maintain lists of persons and organisations which, according to decisions adopted by consensus in the relevant body, have ties to al-Qaida or the Taliban.
The sanctions provide for the freezing of all bank accounts and assets, refusal of entry or transit and an arms embargo.
Any UN member country can apply for the names of persons or organisations to be added to the list.
An Ombudsperson appointed in 2010 ensures that the rights of listed persons or organisations are respected, examines applications for de-listing and makes recommendations in this connection to the Committee in line with precisely regulated procedures.
The Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy envisages four pillars on which cooperation on counter-terrorism can be based:
measures to address the conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism
measures to prevent and combat terrorism
measures to build states' capacity to prevent and combat terrorism and to strengthen the role of the United Nations system in this regard
measures to ensure respect for human rights for all and the rule of law as the fundamental basis of the fight against terrorism
“United against terrorism – Recommendations for a global counter-terrorism strategy”, May 2006 PDF | 262 KB
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, 8 September 2006 PDF | 248 KB
The UN Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
Bild: NATO family portrait
There had been a “really good and in-depth discussion” in the North Atlantic Council, he reported, and in the matter of alliance solidarity “an extraordinary degree of unanimity”.
Although the international situation was anything but simple, NATO partners had kept “cool heads” in their deliberations.
Ahead of the discussions with his NATO counterparts, Steinmeier had warned of the need to prevent a new division of Europe.
He had pointed out, however, that two things were crucial “in this extraordinarily difficult situation”.
Steinmeier warned that the Crimean crisis was “the most serious conflict we’ve seen in years, in decades”.
The participants in the meeting had accordingly condemned Russia’s actions in Crimea and agreed to rethink relations with Russia in this light.
This year, the Forum will focus on illicit financial flows (IFFs) in and out of Africa and their impact on the continent’s security.
Once again, the Forum will be held in the northern Ethiopian town of Bahir Dar, on the shores of Lake Tana.
Like the Munich Security Conference, the Tana Forum was not conceived of as a traditional summit meeting, but rather as an institutionally and politically independent platform for informal and direct communication between policymakers and key stakeholders from civil society, academia and business.
This format enables the African Union member states and relevant stakeholders to discuss their ideas regarding peace and security policy for their continent without being constrained by the protocol of more formal events.
Now that the start-up funding from the Federal Foreign Office has been put to successful use, the Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development (BMZ) will assume responsibility for financing the African security conference from 2014.
In a joint statement NATO foreign ministers announced the suspension of practical cooperation with Russia – for the time being only the high-level political dialogue between NATO and Russia will continue.
Speaking at the end of the discussions, Steinmeier noted that the alliance’s future relations with Russia would depend above all on Russia itself.
That would also depend, for example, on whether announcements of Russian troop withdrawals from areas along the border with Ukraine were followed by corresponding action.
The alliance had a duty, he stressed, to help Ukraine become a “functioning and economically viable state that is able to act effectively”.
Under the terms of this agreement, which was brokered by the foreign ministers of the Weimar Triangle, i.e. Germany, France and Poland, and ended the bloody conflict in Kyiv, a new constitution is to be drawn up for the country.
Germany was backing these efforts, he continued. That was why a group of top German officials travelled to Kyiv on 1 April to see where an exchange of experience could be of help.
Afghanistan also discussed
Bild: NATO emblem
With regard to Germany’s commitment after 2014, the German Foreign Minister stated:
Germany will not turn its back on Afghanistan.
We are prepared to stand by the country even after the end of the ISAF mission and the withdrawal of our combat troops in late 2014 (...)
The preparation of the NATO summit in autumn 2014 was also discussed.
The talks will focus on NATO’s future direction as both a security policy organisation and a strategic alliance.
During the Brussels meeting the NATO-Georgia Commission and the Istanbul Cooperation Initiative also convened.
Ahead of the presidential elections due to take place in Afghanistan on 5 April, Foreign Minister Steinmeier told the Neue Osnabrücker Zeitung that 2014 could become a crossroads for Afghanistan – provided that “the Afghans elect a new head of state in transparent and free elections”.
– if Afghanistan wants that and creates the right legal and political framework.
On Tuesday (1 April) and Wednesday (2 April) Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier attended the meeting of NATO foreign ministers in Brussels.
During the spring meeting, the 28 foreign ministers discussed the implications of the Crimean crisis in the North Atlantic Council and the NATO-Ukraine Commission.
In view of their concern over Russia’s actions in Crimea, the ministers reaffirmed their solidarity with members of the alliance.
In their talks with Ukrainian Foreign Minister Andriy Deshchytsia NATO members emphasised their desire to intensify cooperation with the alliance’s East European partner country of long standing.
The Crimean crisis, support for Ukraine and the question of what line to take in future towards Russia dominated the deliberations of the 28 NATO foreign ministers at their spring meeting.
Bild: The Weimar Triangle foreign ministers arrive for a meeting with President Yanukovych
The first and foremost priority is to implement reforms on the basis of the so-called Agreement of 21 February.
On Wednesday, the second day of the NATO foreign ministers meeting, continued support for Afghanistan after 2014 was discussed at a meeting of NATO and non-NATO troop contributors to ISAF.
“According to the Robert Koch Institute, in 2013 more than 700 German travellers abroad returned home with dengue fever, 25 of whom had been to Brazil,” says Dr Jonas Schmidt-Chanasit, Head of the virus diagnostics department at the Bernhard Nocht-Institute for Tropical Medicine in Hamburg.
Core Group condemns Assad’s plans to hold elections in Syria
Only as part of a peace process can elections in Syria have true legitimacy.
The core group condemns actions by the Assad regime to pave the way for presidential elections.
Given the dramatic situation in the country, running democratic elections is impossible.
Large sections of the population will not be able to cast their votes.
United Nations Joint Special Representative Lakhdar Brahimi warned that such elections would be tantamount to ending all efforts to bring about a political process.
Statement by the core group of the Group of Friends of the Syrian People
Along with its fellow core group members, the Federal Government is urging the Government in Damascus to return to the negotiating table in Geneva and embark on a path leading to a political settlement and an end to violence.
Prisons are also a key issue.
The United Nations has thus devoted more attention to this theme in the past years.
An international exchange of experience
Training for peace operations
Since 2011 its contribution to peace and security in Africa has been acknowledged annually on African Border Day.
Access to the historical documents from the national archives in Germany, which include treaties, laws, reports and maps, will simplify the delimitation of African borders for the AU and its member states.
Since then German historians have located old African border treaties in all European archives and compiled them in a database.
The Federal Foreign Office is promoting this capacity-building through the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH.
The focus was on issues such as training, mentoring and advising.
The question of how to mobilise further resources for this neglected field was also discussed.
Experts wanted
Civilian experts are in high demand.
As well as correction officers, both judges and prosecutors who speak fluent English, French or Arabic are often sought for international missions.
“But we help candidates prepare properly.
Promoting the rule of law is an issue to which Germany attaches particular importance.
Secretariat of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) Desertification was identified as one of the biggest challenges of our time at the Rio Earth Summit back in 1992.
The feedback from the participants was thoroughly positive.
Its task is to collate and analyse scientific data on the protection of biodiversity worldwide and propose courses of action.
In spring 2014 the UNCCD-GM office will relocate to the UN Campus Bonn.
Boy in Afghanistan
The core group of the Group of Friends of the Syrian People has made a statement today that is set out below.
The Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC) was adopted by the UN General Assembly on 20 November 1989 and entered into force on 20 September 1990.
It has been ratified by almost all the countries in the world – no other international treaty has achieved such universal validity.
The Convention on the Rights of the Child, which entered into force for the Federal Republic of Germany on 5 April 1992, has now been ratified by 193 states -
more than any other human rights convention.
Convention on the Rights of the Child of 20 November 1989
Comprehensive children’s rights of universal validity are enshrined in the Convention.
The four fundamental rights of the child set out in the Convention are the right to life and health, the right to development, consideration of the best interests of the child and the ban on discrimination, as well as the right to be involved in all decisions affecting his/her life.
The UN treaty body established by the Convention, the Committee on the Rights of the Child, monitors the Convention’s implementation.
The Committee of eighteen experts receives periodic reports from the signatory states and publishes its evaluations on its Internet site.
Germany submitted its most recent report to the Committee on the Rights of the Child in January 2014.
On ratifying the Convention, Germany declared a reservation in order to avoid incorrect or over-interpretation.
The coalition agreement for the 17th legislative period, however, included the withdrawal of this reservation. The text of the agreement reads as follows: “We want to withdraw the reservation relating to the UN children’s rights convention.”
The Convention on the Rights of the Child is now unconditionally valid in Germany.
Protection from sexual exploitation and trafficking
It obliges states to prosecute such violations.
The Protocol entered into force for the Federal Republic of Germany in August 2009, and the Committee on the Rights of the Child monitored its implementation for the first time in January 2014.
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography of 25 May 2000 (PDF, 30 KB)
The post of United Nations Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography was mandated in 1990 and has been held since May 2008 by Najat M’jid Maalla, a Moroccan woman.
Special Rapporteur on child trafficking and child prostitution
Prohibition of recruiting minors (child soldiers)
Child soldier in the Congo
The Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child of 12 February 2002 on the involvement of children in armed conflict supplements the Convention by giving additional protection to children in armed conflicts.
The German instrument of ratification was deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations on 13 December 2004.
In July 2012 the United Nations Secretary-General appointed Leila Zerrougui from Algeria as his Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict.
She replaced Radhika Coomaraswamy from Sri Lanka, who had held the post from 2006.
This resolution introduced for the first time a monitoring and reporting mechanism on children and armed conflict, thereby strengthening the UN’s instruments to determine whether children are being illegally recruited or their rights seriously violated and if necessary impose sanctions.
It calls on the Secretary-General to list in the annexes to his reports also those parties to armed conflict that carry out deliberate killings and maiming of children and/or rape and other sexual violence against children.
In addition there is a Security Council Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. Germany occupied the chair of this group during its membership of the Security Council in 2011/2012.
During its chairmanship Germany put forward a resolution extending the criteria for the inclusion of a party on the list, particularly with regard to attacks on schools and hospitals.
Thus Germany was able to push through one of its key priorities, that is, to improve the protection of children’s rights, including in armed conflicts.
Resolution 1998 was adopted unanimously by the Security Council in July 2011.
United Nations Security Council Resolution 1998 of 12 July 2011 PDF | 46 KB
Individual complaints
This protocol provides children with an instrument through which they can assert and defend their own rights.
In practice it means that, if any country violates a right which is enshrined in the Convention on the Rights of the Child or one of its other two existing Optional Protocols, children and adolescents can take their complaints directly to the United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child.
This is on the condition that the case has been through the country’s own courts without success.
The Protocol also provides for protection for children who have brought a complaint before the Committee, to ensure that they do not suffer any negative repercussions.
If particularly serious violations of the rights of the child are discovered, the Committee can investigate the claims even without receiving a specific complaint from a particular child.
The possibility of establishing a process for children’s’ individual complaints had long been under discussion.
The UN Convention on the Rights of the Child was the only international human rights treaty with a mandatory reporting procedure that did not yet have an individual complaints mechanism.
For this reason, the UN Human Rights Council agreed in June 2009 to charge a working group with the question of whether the creation of an optional protocol to address this issue would be possible or desirable.
Germany was also involved in the negotiations which led to this point, pushing hard to see a children’s complaints procedure established.
When the UN Human Rights Council reached its decision and when the General Assembly adopted the Optional Protocol on 19 December 2011, Germany was one of its main advocates.
The procedure for complaints by individuals will enter into force in April 2014 once it has been ratified by ten countries.
The German Government is working within the United Nations to push for swift ratification of the protocol by other states to ensure that children have greater protection in the future.
Prevention of violence against children
Girl on a swing
On 1 May 2009 the United Nations Secretary-General appointed Marta Santos Pais of Portugal as the first Special Representative on Violence against Children, initially for a period of three years.
In doing so, the Secretary-General was complying with the mandate of the General Assembly of autumn 2007 as well as with one of the central demands of the United Nations Study on Violence against Children published in October 2006.
The German Government works in close cooperation with the Special Representative and also funds her work through voluntary contributions.
Ms Santos Pais and UNICEF jointly issued a study on protecting children from violence in July 2011.
She visited Germany in June 2011 to present the study and speak with children’s rights organisations.
Startseite: Remembering the victims of the genocide in Rwanda
Today (4 April), the Bundestag remembered the victims of the genocide in Rwanda 20 years ago.
Remembering the victims of the genocide in Rwanda
Click here for more information on the UNICEF study
on protecting children from violence
Initiatives in the United Nations
Each year Germany joins with the EU and the Group of Latin American and Caribbean Countries (GRULAC) to introduce to the General Assembly a comprehensive resolution (omnibus resolution) which also addresses important individual issues.
The EU and GRULAC also submit an annual resolution on children to the Human Rights Council in Geneva during its March meeting.
In 2014 this resolution concerned access to justice for children.
United Nations Organisations in Germany
The so-called Global Mechanism (UNCCD-GM) was established under Article 21(4) of the UNCCD to provide technical and financial support for affected developing country parties.
Secretariat of the Intergovernmental Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) The UN General Assembly gave the go-ahead for the establishment of the Platform on 21 December 2010.
Since early 2014 the Platform has been based at the UN Campus Bonn.
On one of these hills in Murambi district, something very terrible happened in April 1994:
when the mass slaughter began, tens of thousands of Tutsis fled to a school there which was considered safe.
Not long after, militia surrounded the building and began to kill people.
Living up to the responsibility
Foreign Minister Steinmeier began his speech to the German Bundestag in remembrance of the victims of the genocide in Rwanda with this bleak description.
The Foreign Minister said it was difficult to understand how Earth could keep on turning after the horrors of the genocide.
As a German, however, he could not speak of genocide in Africa without remembering the genocide in Germany.
The most important lesson which has to be taken from a day of remembrance like today is: never again!
Failure of the international community
Bild: Refugees following the outbreak of the genocide in Rwanda, April 1994
Intergovernmental Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services
The Federal Government offered to host the IPBES secretariat in the city of Bonn, which is already home to various related UN bodies, as a sign of its continued commitment to the process and
Germany has been working for a long time to create this platform.
thus since the beginning of 2014 the IPBES office has been located at the UN Campus on the Rhine.
“The international community failed when it withdrew its blue helmets from Rwanda 20 years ago in the midst of the violence.”
Steinmeier reaffirmed that the international community therefore had a special responsibility for the victims:
Foreign Minister Steinmeier on the elections in Afghanistan
to prevent genocide!
Bild: Lake in Volcanoes National Park in Rwanda
All of these instruments would therefore be incorporated into the German Government’s Africa policy guidelines.
The Minister stated that the lessons learned from the genocide therefore included the promise of prosperity alongside the promise of peace.
The determination and courage of the people to have their say and participate in shaping their country's future, as reflected in the high voter turnout, is impressive.
The German Bundestag remembered the victims of the genocide on 4 April 2014.
Obviously, the Taliban failed in their efforts to sabotage the elections with threats and violence, even though the security situation remains tense.
This is a good start.
Speech by Foreign Minister Steinmeier in the German Bundestag remembering the victims of the genocide in Rwanda (4 April 2014)
It is essential now that the counting of the votes as well as the processing of complaints proceed in a transparent, swift and credible manner.
Federal Foreign Office stories: 20 years after the genocide, a colleague remembers his time in Kigali
Regional focuses of the Federal Foreign Office: Africa
Bild: Steinmeier remembering the victims of the genocide in Rwanda
In his speech, Foreign Minister Steinmeier stressed that the international community had failed in Rwanda and would have to live up to its responsibility to do everything in its power to prevent genocide.
In literature and in the vernacular, Rwanda is often called the land of a thousand hills.
Biodiversity
Agriculture in action
The Earth is home to some 1.74 million identified species.
Experts assume that the number of undiscovered species is far higher, and that we may share the planet with some 14 million other kinds of animals and plants.
Human activity and climate change present ever more of a threat to this fascinating biological diversity.
Preserving biodiversity, the biological diversity found on our planet, is closely linked to issues of international climate protection – even if this has not yet been fully understood in the public debate – and is no less important for ourselves and future generations than is climate policy.
Preserving biodiversity is an imperative if we are to sustain our planet’s ecosystems.
Convention on Biological Diversity
Germany is a party to the 1992 Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), which already has 191 states parties.
The objective of the Convention is to preserve biodiversity, to which it counts the diversity of species on Earth, genetic diversity and the diversity of ecosystems.
Alongside the conservation aspect, this objective includes the sustainable use of the components of biodiversity and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the utilization of genetic resources.
The CBD is the first international convention that regards biodiversity as a resource controlled by states.
Biodiversity is thereby placed on the same level as minerals or other natural resources.
At the 10th Conference of the Parties in October 2010, the international community set itself a new global biodiversity target and developed a Strategic Plan for the years 2011 to 2020.
The adoption of an international Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits arising from their Utilization (Nagoya Protocol) represented another milestone.
Intergovernmental Platform (IPBES)
In order to raise international awareness of the urgency of protecting biodiversity, in addition to other environmental and climate policy issues, the UN General Assembly decided in December 2010 to set up an Intergovernmental Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES).
Like the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), which advises governments on the science of climate change, the Biodiversity Platform is designed to foster the links between science and politics, enabling scientists to monitor changes in biodiversity and advise environmental policy-makers.
The protection of endangered species
One aspect of the conservation of biodiversity is protecting endangered species in the animal kingdom.
Germany is particularly committed to protecting whales and other migratory animals,
and has signed both the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (Washington Convention, CITES) and the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (Bonn Convention, CMS).
Germany has also been a member of the International Whaling Commission (IWC) since 1982.
The Federal Government actively supports the ban on commercial whaling.
Under the Berlin Initiative on Strengthening the Conservation Agenda of the International Whaling Commission, adopted at Germany’s behest, considerably more weight is now attached within the IWC to preserving and protecting whales, including small cetaceans and dolphins.
In addition, Germany is party to various regional agreements on the protection of specific species or groups which are endangered but not yet necessarily threatened with extinction.
Steinmeier went on to say that although the tragedies were different, the same lessons had to be learned:
However, Steinmeier went on to say that many new things were emerging in Africa:
“Africa is a continent on the rise and we have to support its progress.”
Discussing new ideas away from the political routine:
Informal EU Foreign Ministers meeting
Their talks focused on the Crimea crisis and the European Neighbourhood Policy.
Twenty-three years after the foundation of the German-French-Polish triangle in Weimar, the foreign ministers returned to the city of Goethe and Schiller.
The focus will be on the situation in Ukraine and the EU's Neighbourhood Policy.
Frank-Walter Steinmeier talking to Carl Bildt, Vesna Pusic and Catherine Ashton
EU High Representative Catherine Ashton and the Greek EU Council presidency invited EU Foreign Ministers for an informal Gymnich meeting on 4 and 5 April.
The focus will be on the situation in Ukraine and the EU's Neighbourhood Policy.
On arrival in Athens, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier said there was at present a "breathing space" in the conflict with Russia which should be used for diplomacy:
What we have just now is something of a breathing space, when we are not seeing any further escalation of tension.
We have to use this opportunity to stabilise the political situation and bring about improvements in the future.
Russia could have no interest in "having a collapsing political system like Ukraine in its immediate neighbourhood".
Steinmeier said he hoped that Russia, by shaping its trade relations and energy prices appropriately, would help ensure that the Ukrainian economy could be kept alive.
Laying the groundwork for support
However, Ukraine itself must also lay the groundwork for receiving economic support, Steinmeier affirmed.
They then travelled to Weimar together.
If economic support is expected, it must be accompanied by active measures against corruption in Ukraine; it must be accompanied by a credible constitutional process; and it must be accompanied by moves to clear up the crimes of the past.
Steinmeier addressing the press in Athens
The investigation into who was responsible for the killings on the Maidan and in other major Ukrainian cities needed to be as transparent as possible, said Germany's Foreign Minister.
In this connection, Ukraine could take up the Council of Europe's offer of help with investigating the crimes.
Syria and the Middle East peace process
The news from Afghanistan on the election process is encouraging.
As far as the Eastern partners are concerned, our joint paper says that there is no point forcing the countries into an either/or decision.
The history and geography of these countries does not allow that.
Above all we must be more flexible and coherent in our neighbourhood policy towards both our Eastern and our southern neighbours.
Coming together to discuss new ideas away from the political routine:
The city of Weimar gave the foreign ministers another opportunity to do just that.
The two-day meeting in Athens will focus on developments in the European Union's eastern and southern neighbourhood, and particularly on the crisis in Ukraine.
Another major topic for discussion will be the line to be taken on Russia.
Gymnich format:
Impetus from the Weimar Triangle
Steinmeier and his Polish counterpart Sikorski
Speech by Foreign Minister Steinmeier in the German Bundestag remembering the victims of the genocide in Rwanda
“The mountains of Rwanda radiate warmth and benevolence, tempt with beauty and silence, a crystal clear, windless air, the peace and exquisiteness of their lines and shapes. In the mornings, a transparent haze suffuses the green valleys.”
We are committed to strengthening the partnership with our neighbours through more contacts between civil societies, closer political cooperation, increased trade and enhanced economic integration.
This calls for a new dynamism in the European Neighbourhood Policy.
Furthermore, the EU's neighbours are to be better integrated into the European internal market.
Financial aids are to be more flexible in future; there is also talk of possible visa facilitations and an enhanced youth exchange programme.
These matters are now to be discussed once again in the larger EU round in Athens on 4 and 5 April.
The withdrawal of the reservation with effect from 15 July 2011 represented a major step forward.
The Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography of 25 May 2000 contains the first-ever definition of these three children’s rights abuses.
The First Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child has so far been ratified by 166 countries.
It raises the minimum age for participation in armed conflicts from 15 to 18, and prohibits the forced recruitment of young people under the age of 18.
This Second Optional Protocol has so far been ratified by 154 countries.
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict of 25 May 2000 (PDF, 23 KB)
The adoption of UN Security Council Resolution 1612 in July 2005 marked a major step forward in the fight against the recruitment of child soldiers.
Security Council Resolution 1882 of 4 August 2009 affords even greater protection.
UN Security Council Resolution 1612 of July 2005 PDF | 39 KB
UN Security Council Resolution 1882 of 4 August 2009 PDF | 42 KB
On 28 February 2013 Germany became the third country to ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Germany signed the optional protocol as early as 28 February 2012, and ratified it one year later to the day.
Federal Foreign Minister Steinmeier met his French and Polish counterparts – Fabius and Sikorski – for joint consultations in Weimar.
Germany, France and Poland have been cooperating within the Weimar Triangle since 1991.
Beforehand, however, Foreign Ministers Steinmeier, Fabius and Sikorski engaged in discussion with students in Berlin:
France and Poland, our two neighbours, have such divergent histories, and yet they have shown, even very recently in Ukraine, that despite different pasts it is possible to shape the future of Europe together, and that is what we three intend to do.
The most important lesson which has to be taken from a day of remembrance like today is:
never again!
Yes, never again.
Minister-President Lieberknecht, Mayor Wolf and the people of Weimar in particular gave the ministers a very warm welcome.
The international community failed when it withdrew its blue helmets from Rwanda in the midst of the violence.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and his colleagues emphasised that they were returning to a historic place – significantly at such a difficult time for the whole of Europe.
The meeting was shrouded by the looming threat of a new rift in Europe, with the Crimea crisis the focus of attention.
Steinmeier, Fabius and Sikorski planned to use their meeting in Weimar to elaborate new ideas for the future of Europe and for peace on our continent.
As well as acute crisis management, relations with the countries in the European neighbourhood were a top priority.
Talks focused on the EU’s southern neighbourhood as well as the countries of the Eastern Partnership.
For example, the ministers stressed the importance of providing better and more active support for Tunisia, which was pursuing a good and right path.
Tens of thousands died just in one day on that hill.
The German Foreign Minister went on to say that by adopting the Genocide Convention following the Holocaust, the international community had resolved never to allow another genocide to take place – but it had broken this promise.
We owe it to them not to give in to feelings of powerlessness and most certainly not those of indifference – to not only speak out but do everything in our power
Africa – a continent on the rise
He added that the tools available within the scope of Germany’s policy on Africa – comprising economic investment as well as cultural exchange, disarmament or the training of security forces – had to be as diverse as Africa’s development.
Only if the economic upswing in Africa created opportunities for everyone and enabled them to enjoy a measure of prosperity could it promote social cohesion and ensure lasting peace – so that the thousand hills “will again be home and provide fertile land to those building Rwanda today”.
At least 800,000 people were murdered within 100 days in Rwanda in 1994.
The systematic genocide of the Tutsi minority and moderate Hutus by the Hutu majority began on 6 April.
The Federal Republic of Germany pursues a networked approach:
it is crucial that the individual measures – such as the training of police and judges – are complementary and build on one another.
The Federal Foreign Office supports security sector reform including democratic control of the security forces and advises on legislation and support for reconciliation processes in societies traumatised by violence and civil war.
a vital and functioning state governed by the rule of law can only be established and flourish in a society where the citizens are engaged and vigilant.
Africa is changing more quickly than our perception of the continent.
That’s why I travelled to Ethiopia, Tanzania and Angola last week.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier will be attending the informal meeting of the 28 EU Foreign Ministers in Athens on 4 and 5 April.
Informal EU Foreign Ministers meeting in Athens
We are not yet of the woods.
At the same time, the Minister continued, it was hoped that Russia would support Ukraine's economic stabilisation.
In terms of the southern partnership, the Foreign Ministers will also be talking about the situation in Syria and further perspectives in the civil war.
Europe's stance on current issues in the Middle East peace process will also be coordinated.
In contrast to the regular meetings of the EU Foreign Affairs Council, there is generally no fixed agenda for the Gymnich meetings, and no concluding document is published.
At a meeting of the Weimar Triangle a few days ago (31 March – 1 April), Foreign Minister Steinmeier and his colleagues from France and Poland, Laurent Fabius and Radoslaw Sikorski, discussed ideas for the further development of the European Neighbourhood Policy.
In a joint statement the three Foreign Ministers emphasised that there was a need for the "formative power of European foreign policy" at international level, particularly in the EU's neighbouring states.
So the partnership with the EU's neighbours had to be strengthened, the Ministers said:
Click here to read the full statement issued by the three Foreign Ministers'.
No competition with other economic areas
The Weimar Triangle is working to stress that the European Neighbourhood Policy is not in competition with the relations the states concerned may have with other states or economic areas.
They stressed that this cooperation had to be continued.
Only in mid-February the three foreign ministers had succeeded in halting the bloodshed between the government and the opposition following long nights of joint mediation efforts in Kyiv.
And the three foreign ministers left their listeners in no doubt that sound cooperation within the Weimar Triangle would continue to be of great benefit to Europe’s future.
Federal Government Commissioner for Disarmament and Arms Control
Disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation are priorities of German foreign and security policy.
Antje Leendertse took over as Commissioner and head of the Federal Foreign Office’s Directorate-General for Disarmament and Arms Control in late March 2014.
At their Chicago summit in 2012 Germany and its NATO partners proclaimed the goal of establishing the conditions for a world without nuclear weapons and, until this was achieved, of reducing the role of nuclear weapons.
Successful disarmament talks are the fundamental prerequisite for the withdrawal of tactical nuclear weapons stationed in Germany and Europe.
Germany also supports regional agreements on zones free of weapons of mass destruction.
Nuclear disarmament requires patience and perseverance, however.
Gender equality in the United Nations:
UN Women (short for the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women) began operations on 1 January 2011.
The decision to establish it was taken by the General Assembly in July 2010, after four years of negotiations.
The new Entity places equal emphasis on the normative and tangible elements which it brings together in its work on equal opportunities and gender equality.
It is tasked with promoting the ubiquitously relevant topic of equal opportunities throughout the whole UN system, providing political advice to multinational bodies and member states, as well as running development programmes on the ground.
UN Women has taken over all the mandates of the four previously distinct entities it combines, and its work will be founded in the whole United Nations acquis on equal opportunities.
This includes the Platform for Action and Declaration adopted by the Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing in 1995, the Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, and Security Council Resolutions on “Women and peace and security”, such as Resolutions 1325 and 1820.
With the rank of Under-Secretary-General, former President of Chile Michelle Bachelet was appointed as the first head of UN Women.
Giving its head the rank of Under-Secretary-General places UN Women on an equal footing with the largest UN departments and underlines its significance in the UN hierarchy.
Alongside its staff in New York, UN Women is gradually building up a large presence in the field for its operational activities.
Its normative work is financed from the regular UN budget, while operational activities are funded through voluntary contributions.
The operational side of UN Women’s work falls under the aegis of an Executive Board comprising 41 elected member states,
“Global zero” is a long-term goal that will not be accomplished all at once.
while the Commission on the Status of Women (CSW) is the body responsible for normative elements.
At its first session in late June 2011, the new Executive Board adopted the UN Women Strategic Plan 2011-2013.
It enshrines a focus on the following goals:
to increase women’s leadership and participation 2.
to increase women’s access to economic empowerment and opportunities 3.
to prevent violence against women and girls 4.
to increase women’s leadership in conflict resolution and humanitarian response 5.
Germany has welcomed President Obama’s offer of new negotiations on strategic nuclear weapons, an offer which Russia has not taken up to date.
to strengthen the responsiveness of plans and budgets to gender equality 6.
to support the development of global norms on gender equality
Policy on women in the General Assembly and the Human Rights Council
Both the General Assembly in New York and the Human Rights Council (HRC) in Geneva have considered the subject of the human rights of women in a number of resolutions.
Violations of the rights of women are generally regarded as human rights violations if they are perpetrated by the state, if they are tolerated by the state or if the state cannot counter them effectively (because of the weakened power of the state, the buzzword being “state accountability”).
“Classical” human rights violations include many manifestations of violence against women (in recent years the focus has been on combating female genital mutilation, so-called “honour crimes” and forced marriage), trafficking in women and all forms of discrimination against women.
The question of whether domestic violence should also be classified as a human rights violation is a matter of controversy within the international community (though not in the Western European Group including Germany).
The relevance of sexual self-determination, sexual orientation and reproductive rights for human rights issues is also a matter of debate.
The office of a Special Rapporteur has been created within the United Nations to address the theme of violence against women, which has been held since 2009 by Ms Rashida Manjoo.
Since 2008, Joy Ngozi Ezeilo of Nigeria has been the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially women and children.
The mandate for her position was introduced in 2004, at the initiative of Germany and others.
The UN Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW)
CEDAW is the most important international instrument in protecting women’s human rights.
The Convention has been in force since 1981.
Germany ratified it in 1985.
As well as a ban on discrimination in all areas of life, the Convention also requires the states parties to take a host of concrete measures – in legislation, the judiciary, administration and other areas – to ensure that women and men enjoy equal rights both in law and in reality.
A Committee of 23 independent experts examines to what extent the states parties are fulfilling the obligations of the Convention and taking the necessary measures to implement it.
The Committee meets three times a year.
From 1989 to 2008, Germany had an active expert representing it on the Committee, Hanna Beate Schöpp-Schilling.
Like all the states parties, the Federal Republic of Germany is obliged to submit a report to the Committee on its implementation of CEDAW.
Given the current difficult political environment, rapid progress is for the time being unlikely.
Germany’s most recent periodic report was presented on 2 February 2009 by the responsible Federal Ministry for Family Affairs, Senior Citizens, Women and Youth.
To implement the Convention, the German Government is in continuous and constructive dialogue with non-governmental organisations.
The next review by the Committee is due to take place in 2015.
The Committee receives additional powers from the Optional Protocol which entered into force on 22 December 2000; this adds an inquiry procedure and a complaints procedure for women who feel their rights have been violated.
Germany ratified the Optional Protocol on 15 January 2002.
The UN Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW)
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW)
The Euro-Atlantic arms control architecture established under the auspices of the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe needs to be modernised on the basis of verifiable transparency.
6th periodic report on the UN Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW)
The Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing (1995) and the Platform for Action it adopted
A Platform for Action laying out the future agenda for all areas of international women’s policy was adopted as early as 1995, at the Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing.
It established the following focus areas:
women and poverty, education and training of women, women and health, violence against women, women and armed conflict, women and the economy, women in power and decision-making, institutional mechanism for the advancement of women, human rights of women, women and the media, women and the environment, and the girl-child.
Since then, the United Nations, the European Union and other international organisations have been dedicating significant energies to these subjects, which also play an important role in Germany’s foreign policy.
Clear progress can already be discerned in some areas of women’s rights, particularly in life expectancy and access to school education.
There are also more women than ever who have their own income.
At the same time, women’s rights continue to be abused in all regions of the world, and calls for political and economic participation remain unanswered.
The implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action has been assessed every five years since its adoption.
The commemorative event held in the General Assembly included speeches from the chairs of the five regional groups.
In its capacity as chair of the Western European and Others Group of States (WEOG), Germany emphasised the significance of the conference and elucidated a Western view of the current challenges facing gender equality policy.
Beijing Platform for Action
To coincide with the 56th session of the CSW on 8 March 2012, the UN Secretary-General and the President of the General Assembly launched the idea of holding a Fifth World Conference on Women in 2015 (20 years after the Beijing Conference).
Their proposal was met with not unmitigated enthusiasm, given that the Beijing Platform for Action has not yet been fully implemented.
Nonetheless, an event of this kind would present an opportunity to address issues of gender equality afresh in light of current global developments, as described, for instance, in the 2012 World Development Report.
We need to keep up with the way issues of gender equality and of policy on women are evolving, especially in view of the outcomes and guidelines which can be expected from the Rio+20 Summit and the end of MDG implementation in 2015.
The Commission on the Status of Women (CSW)
The central organ in the United Nations for women’s issues and gender equality is the Commission on the Status of Women of ECOSOC (the UN Economic and Social Council), which was set up as early as 1946 on the initiative of, among others, the then First Lady of the United States, Eleanor Roosevelt.
Its main task is to promote women’s rights and to ensure equal rights for women.
By contributing to the continuing codification of women’s rights, it fulfils an important function in international law.
The CSW has been meeting annually in New York since 1993.
Its 45 members are elected in ECOSOC for periods of four years.
The establishment of UN Women has created new tasks for the CSW.
Since January 2011, it has also functioned as the supervisory body for UN Women’s normative work.
Germany greatly values the work done by the CSW and has been a member of the Commission since 2008.
The Commission on the Status of Women has addressed a great variety of equality-based themes in recent years, including the equal participation of women in political decision-making processes, issues of the gender perspective and the special situation of women in connection with poverty eradication, the role of women in development policy and women’s access to the media and to information and communications technology (ICT).
In 2004, the CSW for the first time considered the role of men and boys in achieving gender equality.
The result was a new dimension and a guide for the future of the international debate on gender equality.
UN Commission on the Status of Women
Click here for information on women and gender equality from the United Nations website.
These EU strategies focus on cooperation based on legally binding and verifiable agreements.
Activities in the context of the EU’s Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP)
Strengthening the United Nations (UN)
Coordinating implementation of international agreements
International conference on sustainable shipping in the Arctic to be held at the Federal Foreign Office
In the Arctic climate change has had visible consequences.
Even though resistance to the death penalty has steadily grown during the last few years, death sentences are still handed down and executions carried out in many states around the world.
Germany and its EU partners oppose the death penalty on ethical and moral grounds as well as for reasons of legal policy and are campaigning worldwide for the abolition of this cruel form of punishment.
World Day against the Death Penalty
The death penalty is not expressly prohibited under international law.
Only the minimum norms enshrined under Article 6 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) are internationally binding.
This might lead to Arctic shipping routes becoming increasingly important for international trade.
Since late March 2014 Antje Leendertse has been Federal Government Commissioner for Disarmament and Arms Control.
Germany is working for the opening of negotiations between the United States and Russia on verifiable and complete disarmament in the area of sub-strategic weapons.
This is the cornerstone of the international nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament architecture.
Germany is working with our partners in the EU and the Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative to strengthen the treaty.
New political momentum is likewise needed in the field of conventional disarmament and arms control as well as confidence- and security-building measures in Europe.
It will be opened by Maria Böhmer, Minister of State at the Federal Foreign Office, and Michael Odenwald, State Secretary at the Federal Ministry of Transport and Digital Infrastructure.
Nevertheless, to date 78 states have already undertaken to abolish the death penalty by ratifying the Second Optional Protocol to the ICCPR.
To this end the German Government is urging countries that are not yet signatories to accede to the CWC.
In Europe, Protocol 13 to the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR), which entered into force in 2003, obligates those member states of the Council of Europe that have signed and ratified it to abolish the death penalty in all circumstances.
Around 50 states still execute death sentences.
Over 130 states have abolished them or refrain from carrying them out.
The Directorate-General for Disarmament and Arms Control works closely with EU member states, NATO allies and other partner countries around the world.
There are many signs of a clear trend towards suspending or abolishing the death penalty, as the United Nations’ most recent five-year report on the death penalty shows.
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
High priority is given to the EU strategy adopted in 2003 to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
Protocol 13 to the European Convention on Human Rights
Eighth quinquennial report of the United Nations Secretary-General on capital punishment (PDF, 592 KB)
Another example of what is being done at EU level to tackle new and increasingly pressing problems is the EU strategy adopted in 2005 to combat illicit accumulation and trafficking of small arms and light weapons and their ammunition.
In addition, active use is made of other coordination bodies and cooperation mechanisms within NATO and the OSCE.
The United Nations is the forum for building a global coalition to tackle the security challenges of the 21st century.
Human Rights Commissioner Strässer: Countering the social exclusion of Roma
The Federal Government Commissioner for Disarmament and Arms Control therefore works closely with representatives of UN member countries and the UN itself as well as with the UN’s subsidiary organizations and specialized agencies to strengthen and further develop existing multilateral instruments in the field of disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation.
EU policy on fighting the death penalty and EU guidelines
Protest against executions in Iran
Germany and our partners in the EU have been actively campaigning against the death penalty for many years.
The guidelines define the campaign against the death penalty as a central human rights issue within the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP).
Furthermore, they set out principles and criteria for practical action, for example on the question as to when the EU makes public statements or in what form it intervenes vis-à-vis other states.
The aim is to prevent the imposition of the death penalty in individual cases, as well as to influence the practice in individual countries and, for instance, to bring about a moratorium on or abolition of the death penalty.
Of great importance here are the permanent UN bodies concerned with disarmament and arms control negotiations such as the General Assembly First Committee and the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva.
The draft resolution was sponsored by an alliance of states from different regions, including members of the European Union.
Christoph Strässer, Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid, issued the following statement in response to the latest Amnesty International report on racist violence against Roma in Europe (8 April 2014):
The latest Amnesty International report shows that even today the situation of Sinti and Roma in many European countries gives cause for concern.
In 2008, 2010 and 2012 the resolution was confirmed by significant majorities, with support increasing each year.
This result confirmed the trend towards a moratorium on or abolition of the death penalty.
For the consequences of social exclusion, discrimination and stigmatisation are dramatic:
These include the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty, the Chemical Weapons Convention, the Biological Weapons Convention, the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons, the Ottawa Convention on a global ban on anti-personnel mines, the UN Programme of Action on Small Arms and Light Weapons, the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE Treaty) etc.
In spheres where instruments and mechanisms for multilateral disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation are still lacking, the Commissioner endeavours to advance the debate on and negotiation of new international agreements.
social disadvantage is widespread and reduces the chances of equal access to education, employment, medical care and accommodation.
We have a joint obligation to resolutely counter the systematic exclusion of Roma in many societies.
A topical example are the negotiations under way on an International Code of Conduct for Outer Space Activities.
UN resolution on a moratorium on the use of the death penalty
The European institutions, as well as member states, all have a joint responsibility to change this.
Ideally, this development could lead to a global ban and possibly the prohibition of the death penalty under international law.
A Federal Foreign Office spokesperson issued the following statement in Berlin today (7 April):
The work done by the Commissioner also supports efforts to give practical effect to the provisions of the Arms Trade Treaty. Germany was one of the first countries to sign and ratify the treaty, which was adopted as recently in 2013.
Together with France, Britain, the United States, Russia and China (E3+3), Germany is endeavouring to ensure that the Iranian nuclear programme serves exclusively peaceful purposes.
In reaction to this, Amnesty International is calling on national governments to, among other things, investigate cases of racist violence against Roma, ensure that the perpetrators are rigorously prosecuted and, in particular, ensure that national police forces respect and protect minority rights even during an operation in an informal settlement.
UN Women is a strong, effective and visible organisation created from the merger of four formerly distinct UN agencies and programmes in the field of equal opportunities and women’s issues: the Division for the Advancement of Women (DAW), the Office of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women (OSAGI), the UN International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women (UN-INSTRAW) and the UN Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM).
The most recent occasion was the 54 session of the CSW in 2010, marking the Platform’s 15th anniversary.
The 57th session of the CSW in March 2013 adopted a concluding document on tackling violence against women which was described as historic.
In November 2013 the E3+3 and Iran reached agreement on a Joint Plan of Action, a first important step towards a comprehensive solution. Negotiations have now begun on a comprehensive agreement to be concluded by summer 2014.
Support for regional organisations
The Commissioner also supports efforts by regional organisations to enhance security.
The Arctic ice cap is melting faster than predicted by existing climate models.
At the same time the Arctic’s sensitive ecosystems must be protected.
Around 150 high-ranking representatives of governments, research institutions, enterprises, associations and NGOs will discuss these issues on Thursday, 10 April, at the conference “Sustainable shipping in the Arctic — prospects for international cooperation.”
Shaping the future of Europe together
Their talks also focused on the situation in Ukraine.
During their talks at the Federal Foreign Office they also exchanged views on the tense situation in Ukraine.
Lidegaard and Steinmeier
Germany is encouraging the countries of South-Eastern Europe in their efforts to draw closer to European and transatlantic structures.
New challenges
In their joint meeting with the press the two Foreign Ministers emphasised that there have been no problems in their bilateral relations for a long time.
They stressed that Germany and Denmark are close partners and allies.
New technologies in the realm of information and communications technology, for example, or increasingly autonomous weapons systems create new challenges also for arms control policy.
They pointed out that their treatment of minorities and successful integration policies could serve as valuable role models for Ukraine’s future path.
The Government’s annual Disarmament Reports provide the best summary of the activities of the Federal Government Commissioner for Disarmament and Arms Control.
Federal Government Report on Progress on Arms Control, Disarmament, Non-Proliferation and the Development of the Capabilities of the Armed Forces (Annual Disarmament Report 2013), PDF | 1 MB
More on disarmament and arms control:
Disarmament and non-proliferation
“We have built bridges bringing us together in a literal and a figurative sense.
This benefits the people in both our countries.”
He added that having overcome the economic crisis it was now important to work together to tackle the political crisis.
Steinmeier went on to say:
Joint desire for an international contact group
As long as EU citizens live with no prospects and excluded from the majority society, the European Union is not respecting the values it claims to represent.
On 8 April 2014, Amnesty International published a report entitled “We ask for Justice – Europe’s Failure to Protect Roma from Racist Violence”.
It examines the heightened risk of Europe’s 10 - 12 million Roma of becoming the victims of racially-motivated violence.
Furthermore, the European Commission is called upon to seek to prevent discrimination in member states – for example, by instigating actions for non-compliance with EU law.
which should include representatives from Russia and Ukraine as well as the EU and the United States.
He explained that they could only make progress “by sitting together around one table”.
The German Foreign Minister expressed his support for the international contact group format to bring all parties, particularly Russia and the Ukraine, into direct contact with one another.
However, the Danish Foreign Minister’s trip to Berlin was his first visit to his German partner since assuming office.
He said that they were pulling in the same direction with regard to their policy on Europe and remained in close consultation.
As well as discussing bilateral topics, Steinmeier and Lidegaard focused on current international issues, primarily the effects of the Crimea crisis.
Steinmeier said that, alongside political stabilisation, the main goal had to be to stabilise the economic situation in the long term, with the support of the European Union, among others.
The post of Federal Government Commissioner for Disarmament and Arms Control was created in 1965 in recognition of the close link existing between efforts to reunify Germany and disarmament negotiations between the major powers.
Implementing the goals of the coalition agreement
As events in Ukraine have demonstrated, such confidence-building instruments can have an important role to play especially in crisis situations.
Internationally Germany is campaigning for the UN Programme of Action on Small Arms and Light Weapons to be implemented in full and for the international Arms Trade Treaty to achieve worldwide validity.
The use of chemical weapons in Syria has highlighted the need for new initiatives to promote universal adherence to the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC).
Germany is one of the countries most closely involved in the important task of eradicating Syria’s chemical weapons. The Gesellschaft für die Entsorgung von chemischen Kampfstoffen und Rüstungsaltlasten" (GEKA) in Munster, for example, has carried out the safe and environmentally responsible destruction of 370 tons of residuals from Syria's chemical warfare agents.
The International Atomic Energy Agency also plays a pivotal role, notably through the application of so-called safeguards in member countries’ civilian nuclear facilities.
Responding to violations of international agreements
When international non-proliferation agreements are violated, as in the case of Iran for example, the German Government seeks assiduously and in close cooperation with our partners to ensure that international norms are respected.
She is actively involved, for example, in the OSCE area, in work to implement and modernise the CFE Treaty, the Treaty on Open Skies and the Vienna Document as well as the confidence-building measures agreed in 2013 in the field of cyber security.
In South-Eastern Europe the Commissioner is helping to implement the arms control aspects of the Dayton Accords and promotes closer cooperation between the countries of the region.
Various schemes designed particularly to foster cooperative security and confidence-building are under way.
Here it is crucial to closely monitor basically civilian research activities in order to identify in advance possible implications for the military sphere and work with our partners to devise appropriate disarmament and arms control responses.
Summary of activities
“I hope that the events we observed in eastern Ukraine at the weekend are not a sign that we have to reckon with further destabilisation.”
Steinmeier and Lidegaard underlined their hope that presidential elections in Ukraine would be held soon and progress in reforming the constitution would be made.
Following his meeting with his Danish colleague Lidegaard, Federal Foreign Minister Steinmeier stressed that the two countries were pulling in the same direction in Europe.
Following his meeting with his Danish colleague Martin Lidegaard in Berlin, Federal Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier stressed that the two countries were pulling in the same direction in Europe.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and his Danish colleague Lidegaard already consulted with one another last Saturday at the informal EU Foreign Ministers Meeting in Athens.
Both ministers referred to the lessons learned from German-Danish history.
An active pro-European policy to counter the credibility crisis
Foreign Minister Steinmeier stressed that Germany and Denmark were now “shaping the future of our two states and of Europe together”.
“We will therefore need an active pro-European policy to counter (...) this credibility crisis.”
With regard to the recent events in eastern Ukraine, especially in Donetsk and Kharkiv, Foreign Minister Steinmeier emphasised:
With regard to the political situation Foreign Minister Steinmeier pointed out that the stabilisation process needed to be accompanied by an international contact group,
Foreign Minister Lidegaard expressed his desire to see Ukraine maintain good relations with both the EU and Russia in future.
Federal Foreign Office summons North Korean Ambassador
The Federal Foreign Office summoned Ri Si Hong, Ambassador of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea today in response to the Government’s announcement that it intends to carry out another nuclear test.
Another reason for the summoning was the launching of several hundred short- and at least two medium-range ballistic missiles as well as the exchange of fire across the the maritime border between North and South Korea a few days ago.
The Federal Foreign Office urges the North Korean Government to take steps to de-escalate the situation and resume dialogue with a view to settling the nuclear issue.
There would be a strong reaction from the international community should North Korea once again be gravely violate UN resolutions by carrying out a fourth nuclear test.
Human trafficking in all its forms – be it for sexual or labour exploitation or any other purpose – is a serious violation of human rights, which the German Government combats with determined action.
Germany is affected by this issue in several ways, as a target country as well as a transit country for human trafficking.
As human trafficking is by nature a phenomenon that transcends borders, efforts to combat human trafficking in Germany can only be successful if there is close cooperation in the spheres of criminal prosecution and victim protection at the international level.
This takes place both bilaterally and multilaterally.
Legal instruments to combat human trafficking
Bild: Kidnapped children in Pakistan
Over the past years a series of multinational treaties and EU legal instruments have served to intensify cooperation in the field of combating human trafficking.
The following are particularly significant:
This Protocol newly defined what constitutes the offence and represented the paradigm shift from punishing solely sexual exploitation to punishing exploitation in itself.
It names forced labour, sexual exploitation, the illegal removal of organs, servitude or practices similar to slavery as forms of exploitation.
On Thursday, 10 April Federal Foreign Minister Steinmeier will host a lecture evening at the German Historical Museum.
Following an introduction by Foreign Minister Steinmeier, former Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd will confront the audience at the German Historical Museum with the question:
In his response Mr Rudd will analyse similarities and differences in conflict situations and conflict management between the July 1914 crisis and current security policy in East Asia.
In addition to events held at the Federal Foreign Office and the German Historical Museum in Berlin, there will be a panel discussion in Paris with Foreign Minister Steinmeier and his French counterpart Laurent Fabius.
Click here for more information:
A guest article by Foreign Minister Steinmeier entitled “1914 – of the failure of and the need for diplomacy” was published in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung on 25 January 2014.
Only then will it ensure lasting peace.
Security policy in East Asia in the light of 1914 Lecture by former Australian Prime Minister Rudd
“kulturweit” ambassadors – bridging cultures across the world
2015 offers another opportunity for volunteers to embark on an adventure abroad.
Young people are still welcome to apply for the volunteer programme abroad starting in spring 2015. The closing date for applications is 6 May.
The main aim of the programme is to offer participants an intercultural learning experience.
Wide variety of placements
Working as a teacher in Lima
One option for “kulturweit” volunteers is working with one of the local partner organisations to plan and implement projects there.
Supervising homework, organising the school drama group or assisting with German lessons – the potential fields of activity are numerous.
“kulturweit” website with online application form (German)
Federal Foreign Office information on the “kulturweit” programme
The event will take the developments leading up to the First World War 100 years ago as a starting point for a discussion of current security policy issues in East Asia.
The invitation is issued in cooperation with the President of the German Historical Museum Foundation, Alexander Koch.
Immediately after the event Foreign Minister Steinmeier will embark on a trip to Japan and China, spending several days in East Asia.
Germany wants to support EU mission in the Central African Republic
Today (8 April), the Cabinet authorised the Bundeswehr to participate in the EU mission EUFOR RCA in the Central African Republic.
Today (8 April), the Cabinet authorised the Bundeswehr to participate in the European stopgap mission “EUFOR RCA” in the Central African Republic.
The German soldiers’ main task will be the strategic transportation of the wounded.
The German Bundestag still has to give its approval – the vote is set to take place this week.
The Federal Government’s motion provides for up to 80 troops to be deployed to the EU mission.
EUFOR RCA aims to stabilise the security situation in the Central African Republic and protect the population.
Germany provides transport for the wounded
A Bundeswehr MedEvac plane
In addition to this, personnel is to be sent to the mission’s strategic headquarters in Larissa (Greece) and the operational headquarters in Bangui (Central African Republic).
The EU mission EUFOR RCA aims to help stabilise the security situation in the Central African Republic in order to pave the way for a political process to resolve the conflict.
Together with their international partners, the European Union and the United Nations are supporting this process.
Since a coup in March 2013 a bloody civil war has been raging in the Central African Republic.
Former members of the Seleka rebel alliance are still carrying out attacks on the population.
According to UN estimates the conflict has already claimed several thousand victims.
The African Union (AU) Mission MISCA is currently present in the country.
France supports the stabilisation of the country with the military operation SANGARIS.
Both operations are tasked with protecting the civilian population.
Dramatic humanitarian situation
The humanitarian situation in the Central African Republic is dramatic and threatens to worsen.
According to United Nations information around 2.5 million people depend on humanitarian assistance in the country, that equates to more than half the population.
There are also approximately 600,000 internally displaced persons.
At an international donor conference for the Central African Republic in January 2014, humanitarian assistance to the tune of 366 million euros was pledged.
To date this year Germany has provided humanitarian assistance totalling 2.6 million euros, above all in the fields of health, food, logistics and ensuring that people’s basic needs are met.
The EU wants to make 45 million euros worth of humanitarian assistance available in 2014.
The Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development (BMZ) has also approved an assistance package of 10 million euros for food, infrastructure and conflict prevention.
Within the framework of the EU mission, Germany is to provide strategic transport for the wounded to be taken to neighbouring countries in the Bundeswehr’s so-called MedEvac planes.
We continue to promote renewable energies, but now within a set political framework and with planned and well-defined targets.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement today in response to the murder of Father Frans van der Lugt in Syria:
The murder of Father Frans van der Lugt fills us with great sorrow.
I welcome the European Commission's support for this policy.
Are you between 18 and 26 years old, eager to spend a longer period of time abroad from spring 2015, interested in working in the culture and education sector and open to new cultures and lifestyles?
If so, submit your application to the Federal Foreign Office’s “kulturweit” (Bridging Cultures) programme. The closing date is 6 May.
Each year “kulturweit” offers around 400 placements in the fields of culture and education within the context of its volunteer programme.
Promoting a cosmopolitan outlook
It is with profound concern that we observe the increasing degree to which religious minorities, including Christians, are being targeted by Islamist terrorists.
The UN Human Rights Council
How the Human Rights Council came about
Thus it can be ensured that sustainable energy policy is compatible with Germany's industrial competitiveness.
Father Frans van der Lugt had represented the Jesuit order in Syria for five decades.
Father van der Lugt’s fellow Jesuit priest Father Paolo Dall’Oglio was abducted in July 2013.
His fate remains unknown.
Metropolitan Mar Gregorios Yohanna Ibrahim of the Syrian-Orthodox Church and Metropolitan Boulos Yazigi of the Greek-Orthodox Church, both of them based in Aleppo, were abducted almost a year ago.
In this context, we call for the immediate release of representatives of Christian churches who have been abducted, among them Jesuit priest Father Paolo Dall’Oglio, Syrian-Orthodox Metropolitan Mar Gregorios Yohanna Ibrahim and Greek-Orthodox Metropolitan Boulos Yazigi.
When he was killed, he was working in the city of Homs, which is under siege from the Assad regime.
It is unclear what led to his being killed yesterday.
Human Rights Commissioner Strässer on the release of human rights activist Cu Huy Ha Vu
Christoph Strässer, Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid, issued the following statement today (8 April) on the release of the Vietnamese lawyer Cu Huy Ha Vu:
That’s how Ryszard Kapuscinski describes Rwanda’s landscape.
One of these thousand hills is in Murambi.
Tens of thousands of Tutsis fled there when the genocide in Rwanda began 20 years ago.
I welcome the release of the Vietnamese human rights activist and lawyer Cu Huy Ha Vu.
Tens of thousands of people died on this hill in one single day.
Jonathan Nturo survived the massacre as a small boy.
“I’m surprised sometimes that grass still grows here. That life goes on.”
Yes, it’s difficult to understand how Earth can continue to turn after the horrors of genocide.
That’s how I felt the first time I visited Bergen-Belsen, Buchenwald and Auschwitz.
But the grass still grows there, too.
Now in spring, the trees are even blossoming.
murder of Jesuit priest in Syria fills us with sorrow
Father Frans was selflessly committed to working for the people of Homs, not wanting to leave them even in the most difficult of circumstances.
He worked primarily in the field of education and supported numerous projects for disabled people.
They don’t do justice to the unique and incomparable nature of these crimes.
Indeed, they don’t do justice to the unique nature of the history and culture of individual nations.
And yet: as a German I can’t talk about a genocide in Africa without remembering the one for which we were responsible.
They influence our actions to this very day and they influence our relations with one another.
They are the lessons of our shared humanity.
For let’s be honest, the international community has shouted loud and clear “never again!” before.
That was in 1948, after the Holocaust, when the United Nations adopted the Genocide Convention.
But we were unable to keep this pledge.
We can never make amends to Jonathan Nturo and all other victims of crimes against humanity for the loss of their children, fathers, mothers and friends.
we owe it to them not to give in to feelings of powerlessness and most certainly not those of indifference – to not only speak out but do everything in our power to prevent genocide!
Rwanda is in the process of coming to grips with the past, of building a new Rwanda.
As different as these countries are, I heard the same appeal from almost everyone with whom I spoke.
The appeal was: we don’t want to be beggars at Europe’s gates.
The African continent is viable on its own and, at least potentially, can provide food and development for everyone.
When it comes to peace and stability, many say: we Africans want to take responsibility for our own security!
We don’t want to ask Europe to send troops but, rather, we want to be able to guarantee our own security, to act on our own.
Members of this House, that also has to be in our interest.
Of course, we Europeans also want Africa to take its fate in its own hands.
We Europeans have to increasingly see ourselves as the partners of states in Africa.
Both sides have realised how close our continents have moved together.
We’ve realised how much we depend on the stability of the other side.
Our goal is easy to describe: strong, responsible partners in Africa.
But there are many ways to achieve this.
My view is that the tools available within the scope of Germany’s policy on Africa have to be as diverse as Africa’s development.
Depending on the country and on its situation, these tools comprise economic investment as well as disarmament and the containment of small arms; cultural exchange as well as road construction; strengthening the rule of law as well as training security forces.
I’ve seen all of these instruments on my trip and they will all be included in the German Government’s Africa policy guidelines which we’re currently drawing up.
Foreign policy is a balancing act between the quest for common ground and respect for our differences – also the recognition of what is incompatible.
Our common ground with Africa – I saw this very clearly during my trip – goes far beyond “never again war and genocide”.
First of all, Europeans and Africans have learned to work with instead of against their neighbours.
This is the guiding principle of regional integration.
I fear that we sometimes underestimate what is being achieved nowadays by African organisations.
Many simply don’t know that the African Union is currently deploying 70,000 troops in conflicts within Africa and is seeking earnestly and not always successfully to restore stability where it has been lost.
Strengthening Africa’s own responsibility, which is necessary for this, played a major role at the EU-Africa summit this week.
Second, we’ve learned to protect people’s diversity.
Living in diversity – that’s only possible in a state governed by the rule of law on which everyone can rely.
That, too, was a principle which played a role on every stop on my trip.
For example, during my visit to the German-Tanzanian Law Centre in Dar es Salaam, where I met students who I hope will have an impact one day on the rule of law in East Africa.
Many of their teachers studied at German universities.
I’d therefore like to take this opportunity to express my thanks to the many German universities engaged on the African continent, in particular the German Academic Exchange Service, which has worked with boundless energy for this cooperation through its scholarship programmes.
Third, we’ve learned that peace or conflict also have a material basis, especially when it is missing.
The genocide 20 years ago was fuelled by material need and scarce resources – conflicts which those in power used systematically to get as many people as possible involved in the murders.
The lessons learned from the genocide therefore include the pledge of peace just as much as the pledge of prosperity.
One is inconceivable without the other.
The Congo, Nigeria and Angola – all of these states teach us that oil, gas, gold and diamonds alone cannot ensure a prosperous development in which everyone can participate.
Rather, this has to be organised at the political level.
I’ll never forget one impression from my Africa trip.
In Addis Ababa I met the Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Ms Dlamini-Zuma.
And again Ms Zuma replied, “Our young people! Our young people are our asset and Europe will also benefit from this asset.”
Roméo Dallaire, who cam to Rwanda in 1993 as the commander of the blue helmets, exclaimed on seeing the thousand hills:
“This a Garden of Eden”.
Only a few months later he had to stand by full of shame and anger and watch the massacre.
Their name remains linked to the crime against humanity committed 20 years ago.
Alongside all the memories which lie in this landscape –may the thousand hills again be home and provide fertile land to those building Rwanda today.
On 6 April, lawyer and human rights activist Cu Huy Ha Vu was released from prison.
In 2010 he was sentenced to seven years in prison after accusing the Prime Minister of abuse of office and advocating a multi-party system in Viet Nam.
He then left Hanoi and travelled to the United States with his wife.
Furthermore, the Federal Government has also offered to use special transport aircraft to fly material directly to Bangui.
This should be undertaken by a civilian provider, no German troops will be involved.
Due to the precarious security situation however, it is difficult for helpers on the ground to reach people in need.
These tragic events may be as different as our landscapes: the hills of Rwanda, the forests of Auschwitz, the poppy fields of Verdun.
Yet the lessons we learned from them form a link between us.
And we also have to admit that in the present day, the demons of genocide have by no means been banished:
Foreign Minister Steinmeier on the revision of the Renewable Energies Act (EEG):
Germany continues to be a trailblazer as it advances the transformation of its energy system.
Following the cabinet decision on amending the EEG, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier today (8 April) issued the following statement in Berlin:
I would like to thank and congratulate Sigmar Gabriel!
Revising this very complex and important part of energy policy in only a few months to improve its practicality,was hard work.
Germany continues to be a trailblazer as it advances the transformation of its energy system in a consistent and at the same time sensible way, focusing on sustainability, security of supply and affordability.
We don’t talk of genocide everywhere but we’re faced with never-ending bloodshed in the Congo, Central Africa and Syria.
We need partners for the global challenges we both face and which we know only too well we can only master if we work together.
We Europeans experience that, for example, when refugees from Africa’s crisis regions reach Europe’s borders.
And Africans notice this when the economic crisis in Europe also makes its impact felt in Africa.
Africa is developing far too quickly and too diversely for us to give our political engagement a snappy motto.
We Germans are making very concrete contributions towards this by, for example, supporting the Kofi Annan International Peacekeeping Training Centre in Ghana or the Peace and Security Centre, which is being built in the grounds of the African Union in Addis Ababa and is due to be opened next year, more punctually than some construction projects in Germany. I was able to see this project with my own eyes during my Africa trip.
And Ms Zuma gave an equally clear answer, something which is not exactly typical of a politician.
The lessons to be learned from the tragic events in our past form a bond between us.
20 years after the genocide, Rwanda is on its way to a new future, without suppressing or forgetting the past.
The thousand hills of Rwanda are and will remain one of Africa’s fateful landscapes.
The memory is etched on the thousand hills.
At the same time I hope that the Vietnamese authorities will release further individuals who have been jailed for exercising their freedom of opinion and demonstration. Viet Nam has committed itself to respecting human rights standards and must act accordingly.
Vu is regarded as one of the most prominent defenders of human rights in Viet Nam.
Combating human trafficking
This is the first convention under international law which gives priority to protecting the victims.
It incorporates the principle of non-deportation where human trafficking is suspected into international law and introduces a recovery and reflection period of at least 30 days for victims.
Furthermore, it regulates the granting of residence permits as well as social rights and the right to compensation for victims.
Compliance with the Convention is guaranteed by an independent monitoring mechanism in the form of a group of experts.
Germany became a party to the agreement on 1 April 2013.
The Directive states that crimes in connection with human trafficking in which forced labour or sexual exploitation involving the use of violence, deceit or force play a role, should be prosecuted more quickly and that heavier penalties should be imposed. What is more, greater protection is to be provided for the victims.
UN Special Rapporteur on Trafficking in Persons
As the result of a German initiative, the then United Nations Commission on Human Rights decided in 2004 to adopt the mandate for a Special Rapporteur on Trafficking in Persons, Especially in Women and Children (decision 2004/110).
The mandate was extended for three years in June 2008 and again in 2011.
The current Special Rapporteur is the Nigerian Joy Ngozi Ezeloi.
She publishes annual reports on different aspects of human trafficking.
Every year, in collaboration with the Philippines, Germany sponsors a resolution in the Human Rights Council on combating human trafficking.
To date all resolutions have been adopted by consensus, most recently in June 2013 on the topic of human trafficking and supply chains of businesses.
Earlier resolutions dealt with matters such as protecting victims of human trafficking or regional cooperation on combating human trafficking.
Special Rapporteur on Trafficking in Persons
Activities at EU level
At EU level the EU action plan on combating and preventing trafficking in human beings was adopted in December 2005.
The action plan takes a comprehensive approach.
Alongside effective prosecution, it aims to improve support measures for victims, optimise cooperation between member states and involve non-governmental organisations in its efforts.
Since then the measures have been largely implemented.
Council of the Baltic Sea States
In November 2006 the Task Force against Trafficking in Human Beings was founded under the auspices of the Council of the Baltic Sea States, in which the German Government is active.
This Task Force establishes a work programme which is based on the obligations of the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings.
The German Presidency extended the scope of the group’s tasks and added cooperation with the Experts Group on Children at Risk to the agenda.
This chiefly regards combating the forms of exploitation “forced begging” and “criminality”, the victims of which are often children and adolescents.
OSCE activities are based on the OSCE Action Plan to Combat Trafficking in Human Beings of 24 July 2003.
She conducts regular talks with the German Government on combating human trafficking.
Combating human trafficking at the national level
The Federal Ministry for Family Affairs, Senior Citizens, Women and Youth (BMFSFJ) coordinates efforts to combat human trafficking within Germany.
Further information is available on the ministry’s website.
With the provision of a Bundeswehr frigate for the duration of the mission, Germany is making the most substantial contribution to the elimination process on the high seas apart from the United States.
Safely destroying Syria’s chemical weapons
The German Bundestag has agreed that the Bundeswehr will provide the necessary protection for Syria’s chemical weapons to be destroyed at sea.
The German Bundestag has agreed today (9 April) that the Bundeswehr will provide the necessary protection for chemical weapons from Syria to be destroyed at sea.
On 9 April, the German Bundestag agreed on the mandate that will allow the Bundeswehr, Germany’s Federal Armed Forces, to provide the protection required for Syria’s chemical weapons to be destroyed on board the MV Cape Ray.
The Bundeswehr deployment mandated today is part of Germany’s extensive involvement in the destruction of Syria’s chemical weapons.
Following the threat of military action from the United States, the Syrian regime declared itself ready to destroy its chemical weapons.
The Bundeswehr deployment mandated today is part of Germany’s extensive involvement in the elimination of Syria’s chemical weapons:
Decisions reached by the United Nations (UN) and the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) established that the destruction should take place outside Syria.
Broad parliamentary support for important international deployment
I am delighted about the broad parliamentary approval in the German Bundestag for this important international deployment.
Below deck on the MV Cape Ray
Additionally, after the decision taken in the Germany Bundestag today (9 April), the Bundeswehr will be taking part in the protective escort for the MV Cape Ray.
Specially converted for the purpose, the US vessel will ensure the removal of Syria’s chemical weapons arsenal and its destruction at sea.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier welcomed the broad support which had met this “important international deployment” in the Bundestag and continued as follows:
Germany has a strong interest in ensuring that the removal and elimination of Syria’s chemical weapons can take place in a safe environment.
In so doing, we are making an important contribution to implementing a disarmament initiative that is without precedent.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier welcomed the broad parliamentary support which had met what he called this important international deployment within “a disarmament initiative that is without precedent”.
an important contribution to an initiative that was without precedent.
An important contribution to a disarmament initiative that is without precedent
The frigate Augsburg
Under this mandate, a German frigate carrying around 300 soldiers will escort and protect the MV Cape Ray on its way through the Mediterranean.
The mandate will remain valid until the end of the escort operation and until 31 December of this year at the latest.
The German Government agreed on the deployment on 4 April and presented the motion to the Bundestag.
Germany has made a voluntary contribution of 5 million euros to the OPCW’s work on destroying Syria’s chemical weapons and repeatedly provided logistical support (air transport and safety training) for OPCW inspectors.
The legal basis for Bundeswehr deployment is provided by United Nations Security Council Resolution 2118 (2013) of 27 September 2013.
Germany’s extensive involvement
Germany has offered to destroy 370 tonnes of remnants (hydrolysate) of the destruction at sea, in a special facility in the small town of Munster in Lower Saxony.
Germany has also made a voluntary contribution of 5 million euros to the OPCW’s work on destroying Syria’s chemical weapons and repeatedly provided logistical support in the form of air transport and safety training for OPCW inspectors.
Speech by Michael Roth, Minister of State at the Federal Foreign Office, at the Bundestag debate on participating in the destruction of Syria’s chemical weapons
Germany’s involvement as part of the international community
External link, opens in new windowBMVg.de:
Destroying chemical weapons
Read more about progress made on the destruction work on the External link, opens in new windowOPCW homepage.
Alongside Germany and the United States, Belgium, Croatia, France, Finland, Greece, Italy, Portugal, Turkey and the United Kingdom are contributing in their various ways to protecting and monitoring the chemical weapons destruction process.
Under this Article, death sentences may only be imposed for the most serious crimes, and all safeguards to ensure due process under the rule of law must be observed.
Carrying out the death sentence on young people under 18 and pregnant women is prohibited.
Report of the United Nations Secretary-General on the death penalty (PDF, 147 KB)
This campaign is based on the Guidelines to EU Policy towards Third Countries on the Death Penalty (EU guidelines).
Guidelines to EU Policy towards Third Countries on the Death Penalty
In 2007 the 62nd session of the UN General Assembly adopted a resolution calling for the first time for a worldwide moratorium on the use of the death penalty.
The EU decision to actively support the initiative was made during the German EU Presidency and is closely linked to Germany’s commitment to abolish the death penalty worldwide.
In 2012 111 states voted for the resolution, 41 voted against it and 34 abstained.
The resolution is one of the biannual resolutions sponsored every second year. It will next be tabled at the 69th General Assembly in autumn 2014.
Resolution of the 67th General Assembly of the United Nations A/RES/67/176 on a worldwide moratorium on the use of the death penalty (PDF, 228 KB)
Their discussions focused primarily on the European Neighbourhood Policy and the current political situation in Eastern Europe.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier welcomes mandate for destruction of Syrian chemical weapons
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier issued the following statement in Berlin after the vote today:
A successful early-morning meeting
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier has met Iurie Leancǎ, the Prime Minister of the Republic of Moldova, for talks in Berlin.
Germany supports the Moldovan Government’s reform efforts and the signing of the Association Agreement between the Republic of Moldova and the EU.
Rwanda is known in the vernacular as the “land of a thousand hills”.
“You’ll be safe up on the hill, in the newly built school,” the bishop had said.
But in the early morning of 21 April 1994, militia groups surrounded the school building and began to kill – with machetes, knives and clubs: a bloodshed which seemed to last forever.
Today he says looking over the hill,
Indeed, that’s how everyone feels when they visit these places.
As a German, I’m careful about making historical comparisons.
These were fateful and tragic events on our continents.
Yet, how we can live up to this responsibility is a much more difficult question.
Even though the international community developed the concept of “responsibility to protect” in response to what happened in Rwanda, even though it has improved prevention, operational capability and international criminal justice.
However, we owe them one thing, even if we’ve to honestly admit that we can’t stop every injustice or instance of bloodshed:
So many new developments have been emerging all over Africa in the last few years.
Africa is a continent on the rise and we’ve to do everything in our power to support its progress.
Although the world of politics and the media are keen to find such a motto – Africa is neither simply a continent racked by crises nor a continent full of opportunities.
Former Federal President Horst Köhler is most likely right: such judgements say much more about us than they do about Africa.
In a speech to mark the 20th anniversary of the genocide, Rwanda’s Ambassador to Germany said,
“We’re building a Rwanda in which everyone [...] can develop their potential and enjoy the same rights.”
I’m firmly convinced that this diversity includes freedom of opinion or religion as well as freedom of sexual orientation.
Only if the economic upswing creates opportunities for everyone and enables them to enjoy a measure of prosperity can it promote social cohesion.
More than to anyone else, we owe this twofold pledge of peace and prosperity to our young people.
After our talks, a journalist asked her a clear question, “What is Africa’s greatest expectation of Europe?”
She said, “Our young people! For their sake, we want to cooperate with Europe, for their vocational training, for their economic prospects.”
In response, the journalist asked the inverse question, “And what can Europe expect of Africa?”
Arms Trade Treaty:
Until now, there have been no internationally binding standards for the conventional arms trade.
with small arms and light weapons in particular proliferating unchecked, fuelling armed conflict and contributing to human rights violations and organised crime.
One of the first 50 countries to do so,
Germany has ratified the ATT.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier leaves for Japan and China
Foreign Minister Steinmeier is setting off today (Thursday) on a trip to Asia which will take him, among other places, to Tokyo, Hiroshima and Beijing.
He issued the following statement in Berlin today (10 April) ahead of his departure:
Disarmament and non-proliferation are important German foreign policy objectives.
Together with our partners from the NPDI Initiative, we want to demonstrate our strong commitment to nuclear disarmament at the symbol site where the first atomic bomb was dropped in Hiroshima.
Asia has undergone rapid development during the last few decades.
while China’s role in the world has grown considerably.
Background to the trip:
In Tokyo, Foreign Minister Steinmeier will meet Prime Minister Abe.
We are engaged in an intensive political dialogue with Japan and China, which includes the current crises.
China’s President Xi recently came on a state visit to Germany,
and Japan’s Prime Minister Abe will be visiting Germany in a few weeks’ time.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier meets Nobel Peace Prize laureate Aung San Suu Kyi
On 2 April 2014, Germany deposited its instrument of ratification for the ATT at the United Nations, along with 16 other EU member states (Bulgaria, Croatia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Malta, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain and the United Kingdom) and El Salvador.
Japan has long since been our partner in the G8,
In Hiroshima, the Minister will take part in the Ministerial Meeting of the Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative (NPDI) and will have talks with his Japanese counterpart, Fumio Kishida.
In China, the Minister will visit Beijing and Hebei province and have talks with, among others, China’s Prime Minister Li Keqiang and his Chinese opposite number, Wang Yi.
Federal Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier today (10 April) welcomed Nobel Peace Prize laureate Aung San Suu Kyi, Opposition leader from Myanmar, at the Federal Foreign Office.
Frank-Walter Steinmeier and Aung San Suu Kyi
Their talks focuses on domestic developments in Myanmar and on bilateral relations.
It is our intention to put an end to uncontrolled arms trading around the world.
Paying her first official visit to Germany, Aung San Suu Kyi also met Federal President Joachim Gauck and Federal Chancellor Angela Merkel.
Talks with Foreign Minister Steinmeier focused on the current constitutional debate in Myanmar, the peace process involving ethnic minorities and regional issues.
Growing bilateral relations
Bilateral relations between Germany and Myanmar were also discussed.
Support for reforms
German support for reforms in Myanmar
The ice cap is melting faster than predicted by existing climate models.
Bilateral relations between Germany and Myanmar
Intensifying cultural relations with Myanmar (17 July 2013)
We have made further progress towards implementation of the Arms Trade Treaty.
Germany has been staunchly behind this treaty from the outset.
The focus lay on the concrete challenges involved in implementing the OSCE Action Plan to Combat Trafficking in Human Beings and the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings.
In the long term, this might lead to Arctic shipping routes becoming increasingly important for international trade.
At the same time, the Arctic’s sensitive ecosystems have to be protected.
That remains our stance today:
we are applying the core elements of the Arms Trade Treaty as of this moment, before it enters into force worldwide.
rThe journey begins for Myanmar’s new Goethe‑Institut (30 September 2012)
“Non-Violence”, a sculpture in front of UN Headquarters
We hope that this will encourage other countries to join us in opposing the unregulated spread of conventional weapons.
Following this he will travel on to China for another first official visit.
His first stop on 11 April is the capital of Japan, Tokyo.
Before his trip, Foreign Minister Steinmeier said:
“Asia has developed at a rapid pace in the last few decades. Japan has been a partner of ours in the G8 for a long time. China’s role in the world has grown considerably”. He then continued:
In our talks in Tokyo and Beijing we want to coordinate closely on dealing with current conflicts and further develop our bilateral relations.
Close coordination with Asian partners
Abe will then take part in the 22nd EU-Japan summit in Brussels at the beginning of May.
The agenda will include the preparations for Prime Minister Abe’s first official visit to Germany on 30 April.
He also expressed his concern at recent attacks on foreign aid agencies in Rakhine state.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier will meet Japanese experts in the German Embassy in Tokyo to discuss security policy in East Asia.
In Hiroshima on Saturday (12 April), Foreign Minister Steinmeier will take part in the 8th NPDI (Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative) Ministerial Meeting.
Chaired by Japan and co-chaired by Australia, the representatives of 12 states will address how to proceed in terms of curbing nuclear armament.
Tomorrow (Friday), the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD) will award Aung San Suu Kyi the International Willy Brandt Prize for her political commitment to democratisation in Myanmar.
In the run-up to this Foreign Minister Steinmeier stated the following:
Following this he will travel on to China.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier travels to Asia
The trip will focus on security and stability in East Asia.
Tokyo’s skyline
“We conduct close political dialogue with Japan and China”, stated Foreign Minister Steinmeier before his departure.
Japan’s Prime Minister, Shinzo Abe
In Tokyo an exchange of views with Prime Minister Shinzo Abe is set to take place in his official residence.
It will be the first time that the two politicians meet.
Steinmeier and Abe will also discuss current foreign policy issues such as the situation in Ukraine and security policy challenges in East Asia.
Discussion on security policy in East Asia
The German Embassy in Tokyo
It is in the interest of both Germany and Europe for the region to remain an area of stability and dynamic economic development.
In the evening Steinmeier will travel on to Hiroshima.
Conference on nuclear disarmament
The Genbaku (Atomic Bomb) Dome, Hiroshima
Germany continues to take steps to pursue the Global Zero political vision.
Cenotaph commemorating the victims of the atom bombs
Before the beginning of the NPDI conference, the participants pay tribute to the victims of the atom bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945 – the first use of nuclear weapons in a situation of war.
To this end, the international delegations will visit the Hiroshima Peace Memorial Park, which is also home to the “Atomic Bomb” Dome, a former exhibition hall for industrial goods.
The laying of flowers at the cenotaph (an empty grave honouring the dead) and a visit to the Hiroshima Peace Memorial Museum are also on the agenda.
Hiroshima is the home town of Steinmeier’s Japanese counterpart Fumio Kishida, host of the NPDI conference.
More information on relations between Germany and Japan can be found here.
Bild: Minister of State Böhmer opening the Arctic conference at the Federal Foreign Office
Germany’s ratification came exactly one year after the United Nations General Assembly in New York voted by a large majority to adopt the resolution accepting the text of the Arms Trade Treaty.
Even if policy on the Arctic was primarily a matter for the states bordering it, Germany nevertheless had an interest in assuming responsibility in this area.
From 11 to 12 April, Foreign Minister Steinmeier will make his first official visit to Japan where he will hold talks in Tokyo and Hiroshima.
From 11 to 12 April, Foreign Minister Steinmeier will make his first official visit to Japan where he will hold talks in Tokyo and Hiroshima.
Arctic cooperation
More about the Arctic and Germany’s international engagement
International Arctic conference in Berlin
Greenpeace Kids also dropped in.
International Arctic conference at the Federal Foreign Office
Climate change has already had visible consequences in the Arctic.
The all-year pack ice belt is shrinking.
The Arctic Sea ice is dwindling.
As a result of this, new shipping routes through the Arctic Sea could become navigable.
The Bundestag unanimously voted to grant the ATT parliamentary approval on 27 June 2013, after the Federal Cabinet had adopted the bill on 22 May. The Bundesrat added its approval on 20 September.
The resultant law expressing parliamentary approval entered into force on 26 October 2013.
Under the heading “Sustainable shipping in the Arctic – prospects for international cooperation”, they discussed how security, environmental protection, the development of new resources and the opening up of new shipping routes can be reconciled.
Greenpeace Kids for better protection of the Arctic
Bild: Green teams with a polar bear in front of the Federal Foreign Office
On the fringes of the conference, the young people met representatives of the Federal Foreign Office, to whom they handed over the petition.
Sustainable new Arctic shipping routes
In her opening speech, Minister of State Maria Böhmer stressed that the interest in the Arctic was now global.
International cooperation was of key importance for guaranteeing the sustainability of Arctic shipping.
The Minister of State added that in essence, this was about how new economic opportunities could be exploited, how the environment could be protected and what contribution Germany could make within the scope of such cooperation.
With the world’s third largest merchant marine and the world’s largest fleet of container ships, Germany had a particular interest in new shipping routes, said Böhmer.
The German Government is also working to encourage other countries to sign and ratify the treaty quickly, particularly by assisting them, primarily developing countries, in its implementation.
The Minister stated that as a trailblazer in environmental and climate protection and with its considerable commitment in the fields of marine protection and polar research, Germany could make an important contribution towards sustainable new shipping routes in the Arctic.
Volker Perthes, the director of the Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik - German Institute for International and Security Affairs (SWP) talked about the importance of Arctic cooperation for security.
Especially in difficult geopolitical times, such as the current crisis between Russia and the West, it was evident that international cooperation was essential.
He added that good Arctic cooperation could also serve as a model.
In five different panels, the participants subsequently discussed the geostrategic importance and economic opportunities of new shipping routes in the Arctic for international shipping.
The special ecological challenges of the growth in shipping in the Arctic was also discussed in one panel.
Website on the Arms Trade Treaty process
German Statement on the adoption of the ATT text in the General Assembly on 2 April 2013
Germany is already making a considerable contribution to the endeavour, for example, through its support for the OPCW.
In the chamber, Minister of State Michael Roth urged the Members to vote in favour of the mandate and emphasised that this deployment would help support “an unprecedented disarmament measure”.
The resolution calls on all nations to support and protect the UN and OPCW’s joint mission to eliminate Syria’s chemical weapons.
Current signature and ratification status of the ATT on the UN website
To that end, the German Government is supporting a series of initiatives – for example, providing 600,000 euros to UNSCAR in 2013 (UN Trust Facility Supporting Cooperation on Arms Regulation) for projects and using national funds to co-finance EU measures to assist the implementation of the Arms Trade Treaty.
Jürgen Hardt new Coordinator of Transatlantic Cooperation
The Federal Government has decided that Jürgen Hardt, CDU Member of the Bundestag, will be the new Coordinator of Transatlantic Cooperation in the Field of Intersocietal Relations, Cultural and Information Policy at the Federal Foreigt Office.
Like all other Federal Government Commissioners, the new Coordinator is to be confirmed shortly by the Federal Cabinet.
Today in Berlin, he issued the following statement on his new office:
In performing my new duties, my aim will be above all to strengthen contacts between the civil societies of Germany and North America.
Transatlantic relations
In 2012, a joint declaration paved the way for reopening the Goethe-Institut in Rangoon, which had been closed in 1965.
For the time being, GI language courses are held at a provisional location; in the long run, the institute is to move into a historic building in the city centre currently being revamped with Federal Foreign Office funding.
When he met the Myanmar-Opposition leader, Foreign Minister Steinmeier assured her that Germany would continue to support the reform process in her country.
Nobel Peace Prize laureate Aung San Suu Kyi was held under house arrest by the military regime for nearly 15 years.
Only when the country embarked on increasing democratic openness did the arrest come to an end.
Aung San Suu Kyi has represented her party, the National League for Democracy, in the lower house of Myanmar’s Parliament since May 2012.
She has announced that she intends to run for the presidency in the presidential and parliamentary elections in the coming year.
Whether or not she will be admitted remains unclear, as that would require constitutional reform.
Foreign policy is the opposite of undue military zeal
In the Bundestag debate on the Federal Foreign Office budget for 2014 Federal Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier expressed his views on the principles of German foreign policy.
Steinmeier and Merkel during the budget debate in the Bundestag
“Foreign policy is the opposite of undue military zeal”, declared Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier, addressing Germany’s parliament, the Bundestag, today (10 April) during the debate on the Federal Foreign Office budget.
He went on to say that diplomacy was “by its very nature designed to prevent violent conflicts.”
The voice of reason in foreign policy
Steinmeier said that international expectations of Germany’s foreign engagement had increased.
He conceded that this was onerous and not always easy, as “political solutions take longer to come to fruition than public expectations.”
Steinmeier in the Bundestag
In his speech the German Foreign Minister commented in detail on the events in Ukraine.
He said the conflict showed that the Cold War was still casting its long shadow over the world.
He continued:“If we want to prevent a new rift in Europe, we now have to implement a powerful and wise German foreign policy in cooperation with our neighbours and the European Union.”
Steinmeier appealed to these stakeholders to preserve the European security architecture.
Sharp criticism of the annexation of Crimea
Foreign Minister Steinmeier uttered sharp criticism of Russia’s annexation of Crimea.
“Anyone who wilfully starts correcting existing borders in Europe seven decades after the end of the war is not only violating international law but also opening a Pandora’s box which will release new animosities.”
He stressed that Russia would be held responsible for this.
Establishing a Ukraine contact group
Steinmeier said that the developments in Eastern Ukraine showed “the precariousness of the situation”.
He therefore hopes that talks on Ukraine will soon commence within the framework of an international contact group.
“Our next step must be to succeed (…) in getting Russia and Ukraine to engage in direct talks.”
New efforts in the Syria conflict and the Middle East peace process
The Foreign Minister appealed to the Bundestag not to lose sight of the other conflicts in the world.
During the budget debate it is traditional for the principles of German foreign policy to be discussed in the Bundestag plenary sitting.
Expenditure totalling 3.63 billion euros has been earmarked for the Federal Foreign Office’s budget (departmental budget 05) in 2014 (2013: 3.49 billion euros).
Speech by Foreign Minister Steinmeier to the Deutschen Bundestag during the budget debate
He explained that Germany was “a bit too big and a bit too important to merely be commenting on international policy from the sidelines”, adding that inaction and disengagement also had political consequences.
He stated, “We can be culpable not only by what we do, but also by what we neglect to do.” He believed that Germany should be “a voice of reason in foreign policy”.
He added that it was not even in Russia’s interests for Ukraine to suffer economic and political collapse, saying that the talks should include representatives of the European Union and the United States as well as Russia and Ukraine.
It also helps ensure the treaty’s timely entry into force.
Close ties with Georgia
Some 150 representatives from around the world gathered at the Federal Foreign Office to discuss the opportunities and risks of sustainable shipping in the Arctic.
On 10 April, around 150 representatives of governments, research institutes, companies, associations and NGOs gathered together at the Federal Foreign Office for an international Arctic conference to discuss these issues.
At the entrance to the conference, around 30 young environmental activists together with a polar bear from the environment organisation Greenpeace drew attention to the importance of an intact ecosystem in the Arctic.
During the last few weeks, the schoolchildren had worked in green teams with more than 250 other children in various German cities under the motto “Protect my polar bear” and collected around 52,000 postcards for better protection of the Arctic.
Germany had specialised maritime technologies that met high environmental standards.
underlined the close ties between the two countries and their shared will to further deepen relations.
After their talks, they emphasised the close ties between Germany and Georgia and their shared will to further deepen bilateral relations.
A familiar face in Berlin:
Panjikidze with Steinmeier
Though this was her first official visit as Foreign Minister, it was not the first time Ms Panjikidze had been to Berlin.
She also has a complete command of the German language,
as she proved to her listeners at the joint press conference.
Steinmeier described his dialogue with his Georgian counterpart as “a demonstration of the close ties between our two countries”.
The two had last met the previous week, at the meeting of NATO foreign ministers in Brussels.
The meeting in Berlin focused on bilateral relations.
By that I mean both its democratisation efforts and the determined and lasting reform policy that the Government has got under way.
I can only encourage you to stick to that path.
As her country’s former Ambassador to Germany, she has close ties to the city on the Spree.
He mentioned cooperation with NATO and the European Union in particular.
Joint press conference with Panjikidze and Steinmeier
“I have every confidence that the association agreement will be signed soon, in keeping with the timetable.”
In consideration of the reforms being undertaken in Georgia, not least in its armed forces, he said,
“I wouldn’t be surprised if we substantially increased cooperation between Georgia and NATO with a whole range of measures.
Jürgen Hardt is currently  of deputy spokesperson on Europe of the CDU parliamentary group, member of the Bundestag Defence Committee and member of the NATO Parliamentary Assembly.
In this context, I will certainly make use of the opportunity to help the American public understand German views on current topics, thus further promoting mutual understanding.
Lebanon: Minister of State Böhmer meets former Prime Minister Mikati
The meeting at the Federal Foreign Office took place against the background of the ongoing Syria crisis.
Germany is helping Lebanon to stabilise and master the Syrian refugee crisis.
The spotlight was on the Ukraine crisis in particular.
Minister of State Maria Böhmer has met the former Lebanese Prime Minister Najib Mikati at the Federal Foreign Office for talks.
The meeting on Friday (11 April) took place against the background of the ongoing Syrian refugee crisis.
A pro-Russian protester in Donetsk, Ukraine
Germany is helping Lebanon to stabilise and master the Syrian refugee crisis.
It was proving “very sensible” he said, particularly at this time, to find out what was actually happening on the ground.
Having provided more than 100 million euros since 2012, Germany is one of the key international donors.
He explained why it was so important to set up an international contact group to establish dialogue between Russia and Ukraine.
an international contact group as a cornerstone
The format is to enjoy the support of the United States and the European Union.
Steinmeier commented as follows:
I see this as the cornerstone.
It would be a small step of progress in a critical situation.
Bilateral relations with Georgia
Growing religious and political polarisation in the region
With one million registered refugees, Lebanon –a nation with only four million inhabitants– has more refugees per inhabitant than any other country in the world.
The task is not only to meet the refugees’ immediate humanitarian needs but also to help Lebanese communities which have taken in refugees and whose resources have been overstretched as a result, either with the water supply or healthcare.
During the talks, Minister of State Böhmer stressed that the growing religious and political polarisation in the region as a result of the Syria crisis would have to be countered.
She said that it posed a threat to Syria’s neighbours, not least Lebanon with its range of religions and ethnic groups.
Only tolerance and understanding could ensure peace, stability and prosperity for everyone in the region on a durable basis.
She also pointed out that there were already measures planned for this summer to return books looted during wartime to Germany.
I believe it would prove a milestone that brings us a good deal further in the close partnership that exists between Georgia and NATO.”
He went on to insist, however, that it would take more than that to change the situation.
Bild. Böhmer and Mikati in Berlin
Foreign Minister Panjikidze has visited her opposite number in Berlin; she and Steinmeier
Georgia’s Foreign Minister Maia Panjikidze has visited her opposite number in Berlin, Frank-Walter Steinmeier.
Alongside German-Georgian relations, the two politicians also discussed the European Neighbourhood Policy and the current political situation in Eastern Europe.
Focus on German-Georgian relations
Foreign Minister Steinmeier expressed his respect for the path Georgia has trodden since its 2008 conflict with Russia over the separatist regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia:
Both foreign ministers underlined their will to foster further development of German-Georgian relations.
Foreign Minister Panjikidze commended the intensive and diverse relations already in place,
seeing evidence for them in the two countries’ close cultural exchange.
She gave the example of Georgia being the partner country of the Frankfurt Book Fair for 2018.
Support for cooperation with the EU and NATO
Foreign Minister Steinmeier furthermore emphasised the fact that Georgia had the support of the international community in its reforms and its pursuit of closer ties.
Both sides gave their assurances that preparations were well under way for the association agreement with the EU to be signed.
Foreign Minister Panjikidze predicted that most Georgians would celebrate the signing of the agreement.
Last week, Steinmeier and Panjikidze both attended the meeting of NATO foreign ministers in Brussels.
Like his talks with Prime Minister Iurie Leancǎ of the Republic of Moldova that morning, Steinmeier’s discussion with Foreign Minister Panjikidze focused on the current political situation in Eastern Europe.
Steinmeier insisted that nothing could be taken for granted in view of the tensions in that Eastern European country.
Steinmeier said deploying the OSCE observer mission had been an important step.
Crimean crisis dominates NATO foreign ministers meeting
After the talks, Minister of State Roth issued the following statement:
Following the Government reshuffle in France, Harlem Désir was appointed to his new post on 9 April 2014.
This includes a bold and impassioned appeal to citizens to play an active role in the European elections.
In our view, one of the key messages is:
Laying the foundations for stable and sustainable growth must now be at the top of the European and Franco-German agendas.
As a close partner, Germany is prepared to do whatever it can to help.
Traditionally, the posts of Minister of State for European Affairs and Commissioner for Franco-German Cooperation are held by one person.
Minister of State Roth performs this role on the German side.
The Commissioners for Franco-German Cooperation are responsible, among other things, for the coordination of Franco-German cooperation at governmental level and the promotion of closer relations between the two civil societies.
Franco-German meeting in Berlin between Ministers of State Roth and Désir
Minister of State for Europe Michael Roth met the French Minister of State for European Affairs, Harlem Désir, for talks in Berlin today (11 April).
Minister of State Roth has met his new French counterpart Désir in Berlin.
Working together for Franco-German cooperation
During our frank talks, there was a high degree of agreement between us on the important tasks ahead.
Minister of State for Europe Michael Roth has met his new French counterpart Harlem Désir for talks in Berlin.
together we are working for a Europe imbued with social cohesion and solidarity.
The meeting focused on bilateral cooperation and an exchange of views on European issues.
Of course, we also had an in-depth exchange on international issues, for instance the situation in Ukraine and Franco-German cooperation on foreign and security policy issues.
Afterwards Minister of State Roth said:
Working together for a Europe of solidarity
The situation in Ukraine and Franco-German cooperation on foreign and security policy were also key concerns.
Minister of State Roth called the meeting "a successful start",
saying that he was looking forward to working with his newly appointed counterpart.
Roth also reaffirmed that the German Government was keen to see "the rigorous reforms in France succeed".
The posts of Minister of State for European Affairs and Commissioner for Franco-German Cooperation are generally held by the same person.
Minister of State Roth performs this role on the German side.
I am delighted that Harlem Désir was able to come to Berlin just one day after taking up office.
I am pleased that our first meeting was such a success and am looking forward to working with Harlem.
I reaffirmed that the German Government is keen to see the rigorous reforms in France succeed.
Bild: Arrival in Shijiazhuang
Foreign Minister Steinmeier travelled by high-speed train from Beijing to Shijiazhuang on Sunday.
The capital of Hebei province has more than 10 million inhabitants.
Bild: Reception in Hebei province
Like Foreign Minister Steinmeier, Zhou Benshun drew attention to the partnership between his province and the Brandenburg region in Germany.
Visit to Hebei province
Afterwards, Steinmeier visited a pilot project run by the German Energy Agency (DENA) in Shijiazhuang,
This was the third time the Schlüterhof at the German Historical Museum had provided the venue for a debate as part of the year of commemoration 1914/2014.
The next stop was a low-energy project.
Rudd used his wide knowledge of the region and the topic to tackle the question
Hebei province has often been mentioned in the last few weeks and months in connection with air pollution in China.
Learning lessons from history
Steinmeier welcomes the guests at the German Historical Museum
Foreign Minister Steinmeier welcomed the guests with the title of a song by Sting:
The focus of the trip is on security and stability in East Asia.
“We conduct close political dialogue with Japan and China”, he had stated shortly before his departure:
It was the first time that the two politicians met.
In a congenial atmosphere, the talks first addressed further developing the close bilateral relations between Germany and Japan.
Steinmeier with Japanese security experts
In recent months tensions in East Asia have heightened again.
The role of diplomacy in preventing wars and conflicts was also addressed.
On Friday evening Steinmeier travelled on to Hiroshima.
Global Zero is more than just a vision, it is a necessity.
Remembrance for the victims of the atom bombs
To this end, the international delegations visited the Hiroshima Peace Memorial Park, which is also home to the “Atomic Bomb” Dome, a former exhibition hall for industrial goods.
The delegates laid flowers at the cenotaph which consists of an empty grave honouring the dead.
Following this they paid a joint visit to the Hiroshima Peace Memorial Museum.
This is not a museum in the traditional sense of the word, rather it is a place of remembrance with many personal memories of those who lost loved ones.
It contains shocking documents which make clear to us why it is important for us to try to fully ban nuclear weapons.
Bilateral meeting with Foreign Minister Kishida
Steinmeier and his Japanese counterpart Kishida
The Minister went on to say that at an event like this, the question of whether history can teach us anything had to be answered very differently from what Sting said in the song.
for which the focus lay on the situation in Ukraine and the tensions in East Asia.
Click here for more on that visit.
“History doesn't simply repeat itself automatically.
And to do that it's worth taking a look at the past!”
There are conflicts in the region at the moment, for example between Japan and China.
Recent developments in Ukraine and the international efforts to defuse the situation were also among the key issues discussed.
Asked beforehand in an interview with Deutsche Welle about parallels with Europe in 1914, Steinmeier said that the point was not to give advice.
Rather, it was a matter of looking very closely to see what was causing the current tensions between the two countries.
Likewise, the Foreign Ministers talked about the situation in the Korean peninsula, especially North Korea’s aggressive stance.
Rudd and Steinmeier in the Schlüterhof
The Government in Pyongyang recently announced that it intends to carry out a new nuclear test.
Steinmeier was visibly happy to welcome former Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, who had accepted the Minister's invitation to speak at the event.
Security and stability in East Asia
From Eumundi to Europe's battlefields
Bild: Entrance to the Forbidden City in Beijing
Harlem Désir was appointed Minister of State for European Affairs on 9 April 2014 in a French Government reshuffle.
Franco-German cooperation
Roth said he was “pleased that our first meeting was such a success” and that he was “looking forward to working with Harlem”.
One important message the two politicians, who are also their countries' Commissioners for Franco-German Cooperation, wanted to put across was their shared commitment to a Europe of social cohesion and solidarity.
Roth and Désir outside the Französischer Dom in Berlin
We regard combating the alarmingly high unemployment rate among young people in Europe as one of our uppermost priorities.
During their intensive exchange in the morning the two men also discussed international issues.
"Successful start" for the Commissioners for Franco-German Cooperation
Intensive exchange between Roth and Désir
With regard to the strong Franco-German cooperation, Roth also stated:
"As France's closest partner, Germany is prepared to do whatever it can to help.
An economically strong and stable France is in the interest of both Germany and France."
This discovery made him want to know more about the dimensions of the First World War.
Steinmeier will end his trip with talks on current international issues with State Councillor Yang Jiechi.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier attended a similar event in Tokyo on 11 April.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier will be back in Berlin on 15 April.
The combination of nationalistic tendencies, unclarified territorial claims and complicated alliances made the possibility of a “failure of diplomacy” most likely in that part of the world.
East Asia and Europe
Click here to find out more about the first part of this trip to East Asia:
Rudd delivering his lecture
More on Sino-German relations
Foreign Minister Steinmeier in China During his first official visit to China since returning to office, Foreign Minister Steinmeier had political talks in Beijing on Monday (14 April).
On his first official visit to China since returning to office, Foreign Minister Steinmeier spent Sunday (13 April) in Hebei province.
On Monday, he is conducting political talks in Beijing.
He then flew on to China to pay another first official visit.
Japan was his first stop on his trip to East Asia, from where Steinmeier travelled on to China.
During the discussion, he stressed that European experience showed that it was necessary to open a dialogue about the past in order to provide “understanding for a good future”.
In Tokyo, Steinmeier said that he hoped that “fora will be found here in which such tensions can be addressed”.
In a joint statement to the press following the conference, Steinmeier stated that the Foreign Ministers’ joint statement sent a strong and united message:
The horror of (the atom bombs being dropped on) Hiroshima and Nagasaki serves to remind us and generations to come that such a thing must never be allowed to happen again.
What you see here and what you hear when talking to eye witnesses renders you speechless.
Rudd sees parallels between China's current emergence and Germany's situation on the eve of 1914:
nobody, he said, had foreseen the start of a catastrophe in 1914.
He referred in this context to the difficult relationship between Japan and China, the security policy competition between China and the United States and the confrontation on the Korean peninsula.
Steinmeier went on to say that Hebei province, a former coal and steel region, was currently experiencing “almost unbelievable structural change”.
after two World Wars, he said, Europe had established its order successfully and peacefully through the process of European integration.
Asia had to familiarise itself with these lessons too.
Shortly after the Minister’s arrival, he had talks with Zhou Benshun, the Party Secretary of Hebei province.
Nor did it have any strong regional organisations.
Address by Kevin Rudd:
“Strategic Lessons from Europe's Past to Asia's Future”, 10 April 2014, German Historical Museum, Berlin (PDF, 468 KB)
We want to look at this today and discuss it with you.
Following the debate, Foreign Minister Steinmeier set off on a trip to Japan and China.
a research centre for energy-efficient building which is still under construction.
Bild: Foreign Minister Steinmeier visits a DENA energy efficiency project in Hebei
The series is aimed at an interested German and international audience.
The German Foreign Minister was also able to gain a first-hand impression of Hebei’s culture and society.
In nearby Zhengding, he visited the historical Longxing-Si monastery and temple, a market, as well as the southern city gate.
Political talks in Beijing
The Federal Foreign Office summoned the North Korean Ambassador in Berlin for that reason.
In the evening, he returned to Beijing, where political talks are being held on Monday (14 April).
Another focus of the talks in China is security and stability in East Asia – also in view of territorial conflicts and the high-ranking dialogue which Germany feels is necessary.
Kishida was particularly delighted that Foreign Minister Steinmeier had started his political career in Hanover.
Hanover and Hiroshima were linked by a close partnership, he stated at the beginning of the discussion with his German opposite number.
Following the conference, both Ministers met once more for bilateral discussions in which they again addressed German-Japanese relations – Kishida is planning to visit Germany later this year – as well as current foreign policy challenges,
On Saturday evening (12 April), Foreign Minister Steinmeier travelled on to China .
Furthermore, the German Foreign Minister is to have a round of talks on the security architecture in East Asia with national experts.
From 11 to 12 April, Foreign Minister Steinmeier travelled to Japan for his first official visit where he held talks in Tokyo and Hiroshima.
On Friday (11 April), an exchange of views with Prime Minister Shinzo Abe took place in his official residence in Tokyo.
In Hiroshima on Saturday (12 April), Foreign Minister Steinmeier took part in the 8th NPDI (Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative) Ministerial Meeting.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier visits Japan
From 11 to 12 April, Foreign Minister Steinmeier made his first official visit to Japan where he held talks in Tokyo and Hiroshima.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier in Japan
At the beginning of his first trip to Japan in his second term in office, Foreign Minister Steinmeier expressed his “firm determination” to continue to strengthen the two countries’ good relations.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and Japanese Prime Minister Abe
Steinmeier and Abe also had an in-depth discussion about current foreign policy issues such as the situation in Ukraine and security policy challenges in East Asia.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier met Japanese experts in the German Embassy in Tokyo to discuss security policy in East Asia.
Steinmeier at the NPDI Ministerial Meeting
Chaired by Japan and co-chaired by Australia, the representatives of 12 states addressed how to proceed in terms of curbing nuclear armament and issued a joint statement.
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), which will be reviewed in 2015, commits all nuclear-armed states to undertake further disarmament measures.
Remembrance for the victims of the 1945 atom bombs
Before the beginning of the NPDI conference, the participants paid tribute to the victims of the atom bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945 – the first use of nuclear weapons in a situation of war.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier was deeply moved by the victims’ personal possessions which have been preserved in the museum.
Following the visit to the Peace Museum the delegations had the opportunity to meet eye witness Keiko Ogura and then pupils involved in the NPDI’s international youth programme.
Hiroshima is the home town of Steinmeier’s Japanese counterpart Fumio Kishida, host of the NPDI conference.
Joint statement on 8th NPDI (Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative) Ministerial Meeting
German-Japanese relations
An evening of debate:
– A discussion of security policy in East Asia in the light of the July 1914 crisis
This was the third debate hosted by Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier and Prof. Alexander Koch, President of the German Historical Museum Foundation, as part of the 1914/2014 year of commemoration.
This time the debate in the Schlüterhof at the German Historical Museum focused on East Asia.
In his address former Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, a Sinologist and proven specialist in the region, addressed the question of the extent to which the July 1914 crisis is comparable to current security policy challenges in East Asia.
This time the 500 or so guests were taken on an intellectual journey to the Far East: the debate focused on East Asia.
Former Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd had made the long journey in the opposite direction to speak at the event.
“Does History Repeat Itself?
It was not a matter of “whipping up analogies”, Steinmeier went on, but of understanding and asking questions:
Speech by Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier at the debate “Does History Repeat Itself? How Does the July 1914 Crisis Compare with Current Security Issues in East Asia?” in the German Historical Museum
The East Asian region was the focus of the evening's attention.
Rudd is regarded as a proven expert on East Asia and speaks fluent Chinese among other languages.
Rudd went on to draw very detailed and knowledgeable parallels between what Christopher Clarke described as the “sleepwalking” into the inferno of the First World War and the highly complex situation in East Asia today.
With the benefit of historical hindsight, Rudd called for a deliberate tackling of security policy challenges in East Asia and shifts in the global order.
Rudd paid particular attention to possible lessons for East Asia from Europe's history:
The region, he said, had so little experience of crisis management and crisis containment.
In conclusion, Rudd pointed out that the European Union and its “predecessors” like the Coal and Steel Pool could even be models for Asia.
Further talks on security issues in East Asia planned
There he will be continuing the exchange of views on current security issues in East Asia and the resulting challenges for diplomacy with academics and experts.
Further information on Foreign Minister Steinmeier in Japan
Series of events “1914-2014”
Security policy in East Asia in the light of the July 1914 crisis
How Does the July 1914 Crisis Compare with Current Security Issues in East Asia?”
In his introductory remarks, Rudd took his audience in the German Historical Museum on a trip to the Australian outback, to his small home town of Eumundi, where he discovered by chance as a boy that Australian soldiers were among those who had died on the First World War battlefields in Europe.
“We consciously chose a region which is not so much in the spotlight,” said the German Foreign Minister.
I personally, and we as a German delegation, are interested in a region facing major changes – which, in the service of the country as a whole, is phasing out old industries and developing new technologies.
How is this process being mastered here, what are the objectives and expectations behind it?
This cooperation focuses in particular on energy efficiency and environmental protection, agrarian and systems engineering as well as biotechnology.
DENA Chief Executive Stephan Kohler (right) and representatives of the German companies involved on the ground guided the German delegation through a project exhibition.
Steinmeier stated that Sino-German cooperation in the sphere of sustainable construction and energy efficiency offered “many opportunities” and called for the cooperation to be further expanded.
Bild: Steinmeier and Wang Yi Foreign Minister Steinmeier had talks with his Chinese counterpart Wang Yi on Monday (14 April) within the framework of the “bilateral strategic dialogue” on foreign and security policy.
The meeting with Prime Minister Li Keqiang will focus, among other things, on the planned visit by Chancellor Merkel in July as well as the preparations for the Sino-German intergovernmental consultations in October.
Coordinator of Transatlantic Cooperation
In performing my new duties, I will endeavour above all to strengthen contacts between the civil societies of Germany and North America.
Jürgen Hardt has been a North America enthusiast ever since he first visited in 1988.
Forum for Security Co-operation (FSC)
The Forum for Security Co-operation is one of the OSCE’s two most important fora for consultation and decision-making together with the Permanent Council.
Broad-based security dialogue
The Forum for Security Co-operation (FSC) embodies the OSCE’s politico-military dimension and, together with the Permanent Council, is one of the two most important fora for consultation and decision-making within the OSCE. The two meet on a weekly basis in Vienna.
The Forum, set up at the CSCE Summit in Helsinki in 1992, aims to promote an open atmosphere based on trust in politico-military questions and devise steps to reduce the risk of armed conflict.
The main tasks of the FSC are:
conducting comprehensive security dialogue inter alia through an annual Security Review Conference and through regular dialogue on various themes in the FSC plenary meetings,
Jürgen Hardt considers it important to focus on the fact that the friendship between Germany and the United States goes much further than this and should be considered in a broader historical context:
negotiating confidence- and security-building measures (CSBMs), arms control and disarmament (examples: Vienna Document, Code of Conduct on politico-military aspects of security),
combating the illegal proliferation of small arms and light weapons including Man-Portable Air Defence Systems (MANPADS) and munitions,
conflict prevention and conflict management supported by the FSC acquis; where applicable launching conflict management mechanisms provided for in the acquis.
The chairmanship of the Forum changes every four months in alphabetical order of the countries’ names in French.
To facilitate and strengthen links between the three dimensions of the OSCE, there are joint meetings of the FSC and the Permanent Council on current security policy issues several times a year.
Germany advocates further extending the role of the FSC as a forum for comprehensive discussion of politico-military security issues.
Forum for Security Co-operation
In 2014 the FSC is being chaired by Liechtenstein, Lithuania and Luxembourg.
From 30 April 2014 Jürgen Hardt will take on this post.
In past years, Jürgen Hardt has concentrated on European policy, in particular European economic policy – alongside security policy – in his work as a Member of the German Bundestag.
The German-American relationship is currently facing many challenges, such as negotiating the far-reaching Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) or clarifying the activities of the US intelligence service NSA.
In this context, I will certainly make use of the opportunity to help the American public understand German views on current topics, thus further promoting mutual understanding.
That year he took part in a winter academy at West Point for American and European students, at the invitation of the Atlantic Council.
As a member of the German delegation in the NATO Parliamentary Assembly, since 2009 Jürgen Hardt has been in close contact with fellow American and Canadian parliamentarians.
In light of the growing economic and political clout of China and other emerging powers, it is vital to continually highlight the shared basis of our relations, and to strengthen and expand our cooperation in many different areas.
030-5000-1197, Email: ko-tra-vz@diplo.de  Address:
Harlem Désir assumed the office of  Minister of State for European Affairs and Commissioner for Franco-German Cooperation just yesterday; he and his German colleague Michael Roth met in Berlin today (11 April).
During their talks and their ensuing stroll across the Gendarmenmarkt, a square which symbolises Berlin's Franco-German history, Roth and Désir discussed current European policy issues and the Franco-German agenda.
One important message he and Désir wanted to put across, stressed Minister of State Roth, was their shared commitment to a Europe imbued with social cohesion and solidarity.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier in China
On Sunday he visited Hebei Province.
Steinmeier and Wang Yi
Wang called Germany a “pacemaker” for China’s relations with Europe.
Good cooperation on the international agenda
Recent developments in Ukraine and the international efforts to defuse the situation were the focus of the discussion.
Wang underlined that the conflict had to have a “political solution”.
Steinmeier also thanked Wang for China’s engagement as a partner in the E3+3 negotiations on Iran’s nuclear programme.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier with Li Keqiang
Another focus of the talks in China was security and stability in East Asia – also in view of territorial conflicts and the high-ranking dialogue which Germany feels is necessary.
In Beijing, Steinmeier reiterated that he was concerned about the tensions in the region.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and State Councillor Yang Jiechi
When Steinmeier met with Prime Minister Li Keqiang, the latter’s visit to Germany at the end of April and Federal Chancellor Merkel’s visit in July were high up on the agenda.
The preparations for the German-Chinese intergovernmental consultations in October constituted a further topic.
Steinmeier ended his trip with talks on current international issues with State Councillor Yang Jiechi.
Furthermore, the German Foreign Minister had a round of talks on the security architecture in East Asia with national experts.
observing the implementation of the agreed confidence- and security-building measures, in particular the instruments contained therein (for example information exchange, inspections, monitoring activities and military contacts) and organising an annual meeting to assess the implementation of the so-called FSC acquis, that is the entire spectrum of FSC documents and decisions,
Furthermore other regions and in particular the OSCE Partners for Co-operation, which include some southern Mediterranean countries, some Asian countries and Australia, are to be involved in the politico-military FSC acquis and the experience of the OSCE.
The Ministers had talks within the framework of the “bilateral strategic dialogue” on different topics relating to foreign and security policy.
Steinmeier and Wang agreed that arbitrarily moving borders would set a precedent and called for de-escalation and abstention from violence.
During his first official visit to China since returning to office, Foreign Minister Steinmeier had political talks in Beijing on Monday (14 April).
During his first official visit to China since returning to office, Foreign Minister Steinmeier had political talks in Beijing on Monday (14 April).
On Monday (14 April), Foreign Minister Steinmeier first of all spoke to his Chinese counterpart Wang Yi.
It was very much in Europe’s interest for current conflicts to remain “under control” and for “all sides involved to continue to talk to one another”.
Visit to Hebei province
Cooperation offers myriad opportunities
Foreign Minister Steinmeier visits a project on energy efficiency
Click here to find out more about the first part of Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s trip to East Asia:
It examined issues connected to combating piracy, drawing on the example of the Gulf of Aden, and looked at the experiences of neighbouring countries and France with regard to maritime security.
The seminar resulted in a commendably lively exchange among the participants from the various agencies.
UN International Corrections Conference
UN International Corrections Conference
The Fourth United Nations International Corrections Conference took place in Germany from 20 to 21 June 2012, and was attended by over 150 correction experts from 48 countries.
At the event hosted by the Federal Foreign Office they discussed prison issues as they relate to UN peace missions.
It is not just building up a police force or assisting the courts that is important when it comes to establishing the rule of law in post-conflict environments.
If they are overcrowded, if prisoners go hungry or have their human rights violated, this can undermine the success of UN peace operations and the efforts of the international community to bring stability to a crisis-torn area.
The mandates of many UN peace operations contain the task of assisting the local authorities in the field of prison reform.
The Conference served primarily as a forum for UN experts and senior correction officers from around the world to exchange experiences.
Since the Conference, the Center for International Peace Operations (ZIF), which is financed by the Federal Foreign Office, has helped organise the annual meetings of heads of corrections and justice components of Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) operations.
This meeting was held in Berlin in 2013. The next meeting is scheduled to take place in New York in April 2014.
It provides experts for UN, OSCE and EU missions and promotes projects in many different countries.
The Max Planck Institute (MPI) has conducted a total of three seminars on maritime security and combating piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, the last of which ran from 17 to 20 March 2014.
This seminar was attended by some 40 participants from Togo, including senior staff from the foreign, transport and security ministries, the navy, the supreme court and the public prosecution office.
For example, they liked the hands-on approach and praised the choice of subject matter as relevant to Togo’s needs.
“The recruitment process for UN, EU and OSCE missions is not easy”, says Sarah Degen-Heinemann of the Berlin Center for International Peace Operations (ZIF).
For example, we give advice on drafting CVs and practise telephone interviews with would-be candidates.
Above all, we run preparatory courses and specialisation courses to ready the experts for the special challenges of working in an international team in a post-conflict country.”
The ZIF has been preparing civilian experts for peace missions on behalf of the Federal Foreign Office for the past ten years. Preparatory courses are offered on a continuous basis.
I am an IT specialist.
Are extra opportunities to work in Germany open to me?
It is possible for those working in the field of information and communications technology to obtain a residence permit in order to take up employment.
A concrete job offer is an essential prerequisite for this.
•	Find out more on the website of the Federal Ministry of the Interior
The Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) of 1993 prohibits the development, production, possession, transfer and use of chemical weapons.
The States Parties have an obligation to inform the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) of all their chemical weapons and production facilities and to destroy them under international supervision.
Since it entered into force on 29 April 1997, the CWC has proven to be one of our most successful disarmament treaties.
Syria’s accession on 14 September 2013 – Syria being a state which possesses chemical weapons – was a milestone on the road toward worldwide application of the CWC.
The Convention now covers around 98 per cent of the global population and chemicals industry.
Only six states have not yet acceded to the CWC:
Angola, Egypt, Israel, Myanmar, North Korea and South Sudan.
The CWC is of particular importance in terms of disarmament.
It is the only multilateral disarmament treaty to oblige States Parties to destroy an entire category of weapons of mass destruction under international supervision.
The Convention furthermore restricts the production and use of certain chemicals, to prevent them being misused as components of chemical weapons.
All the data that CWC States Parties need to declare are subject to systematic on-site verification.
These inspections take the CWC beyond the simple prohibition and destruction of weapons of mass destruction.
The CWC’s entry into force in 1997 saw the establishment of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) based in The Hague.
The OPCW monitors the States Parties’ implementation of and adherence to the CWC.
One of its principal tasks is to conduct on-site inspections, systematically verifying declared chemical weapons and production facilities and ensuring they are destroyed.
In addition, regular inspections in the chemicals industry relevant to the CWC are intended to guarantee that its activities only serve purposes which are not prohibited.
An EU Blue Card or a relevant entry visa can be issued to IT workers who earn an annual salary of 37,128 euros (2014) or more.
If you do not have a concrete job offer, you can apply for a jobseeker’s visa.
A quick test to check if and when you can gain access to the labour market along with more information on the topic of “working in Germany” can be found on the employment office link below.
You can also find comprehensive information on “immigrating to Germany” on the Federal Ministry of the Interior’s website.
The inspections are intended to bolster the States Parties’ confidence that the CWC is being upheld.
It furthermore has an obligation to coordinate measures to protect and help the victims of chemical attack in an emergency.
Every five years, the States Parties convene for a special conference to review implementation of the CWC and decide on recommendations for the future direction of the OPCW’s work. The third such conference was held in The Hague from 9 to 18 April 2013.
These decisions were preceded by the framework for the destruction of Syria’s chemical weapons that the United States and Russia agreed on 14 September 2013 and Syria’s own declaration on the same day that it would accede to the CWC.
Because of the civil war in Syria itself, the chemicals weapons are to be removed and safely destroyed outside the country with the assistance of other CWC States Parties, including Germany.
Text Japan film:
Has the conflict in Ukraine caught you on the wrong foot?
Why were you so surprised by this crisis?
Putin has annexed Crimea.
That’s undoubtedly the case in Crimea.
Russia’s actions are politically unacceptable and a violation of international law.
He first held talks in Tokyo and then travelled on to Hiroshima.
Hiroshima’s youngest are particularly excited today,
There, the heads of delegation receive messages of peace from Japanese pupils and make their way to the adjacent museum.
The city was almost completely destroyed by the explosion.
Whoever has walked around this museum, has had the chance to talk to survivors as we did this morning, knows that politicians have a responsibility to ensure that this never happens again.
We are working for our convictions.
A world free of nuclear weapons is not a vision, it is a necessity.
Of course this cannot be achieved overnight, according to Steinmeier.
However, progress in nuclear disarmament is currently being threatened by crises such as in Ukraine or North Korea’s nuclear programme.
In a meeting of experts, he first stressed the importance of dialogue on territorial conflicts in the region.
It was the first time that the two politicians met.
Has Europe acted decisively enough?
I know from countless meetings and telephone conversations that John Kerry and I take the same view of the situation.
But why didn’t you call for tougher sanctions?
That’s what’s behind our strategy.
Is Berlin losing influence?
That’s why I advocated that Europe be represented by Catherine Ashton.
I wrote a letter to Secretary of State Kerry explaining this.
Are you concerned that Russia will also intervene in eastern Ukraine?
That would be a serious mistake.
There are many indications to suggest that Russia is playing things by ear.
That’s why it’s so important that we have OSCE observers in Ukraine.
There has now been gunfire in eastern Ukraine, there have been fatalities.
Public buildings have also been occupied.
The occupation of public buildings by violent and, in some cases, armed pro-Russian demonstrators is making the situation in eastern and southern Ukraine even more dangerous.
Could Russia also intervene in Moldova?
Some in the West are saying that Ukraine can only be protected effectively if it joins NATO.
Those who say that should first of all take a look at Ukraine.
Wouldn’t it be better to leave the Russians in the dark about that?
Was that the right way forward?
It was right not to deny them this protection.
Whenever I was there, we didn’t get past the rituals of protocol.
That was a mistake.
What is the deciding factor when it comes to NATO accession?
That the majority of the population are in favour?
NATO is an open alliance with clear criteria.
Should the EU hold out the prospect of membership to Ukraine?
Ukraine has now signed the political section of the Association Agreement.
So association isn’t the last step?
Ukraine hasn’t even signed the entire Association Agreement yet.
The EU wants to provide Ukraine with financial support.
That’s why we’re seeking a dialogue with Russia.
Are his reactions therefore understandable?
I’m one of those who want more cooperation and less confrontation.
Doesn’t he accept the course of history?
Are you disappointed by your counterpart Sergey Lavrov, who didn’t react to all of your proposals on resolving the Ukraine crisis?
Has your policy of cooperation with Russia failed?
The plan is that they will all have been destroyed by the end of June 2014.
That requires an active foreign policy.
At 8.15 in the morning, time stood still in Hiroshima.
It is particularly alive for eye witnesses,
In a joint declaration, amongst other things the NPDI representatives speak in favour of further disarmament measures.
More than 82 per cent (around 55,000 tonnes) of the world’s declared stockpiles have been destroyed.
The US has now destroyed around 90 per cent of its “Category 1”chemical weapons, Russia 77 per cent and Libya 90 per cent.
According to the countries themselves, the work should be finished in 2023 (US), 2015 (Russia) and 2016 (Libya) respectively.
Held in 2011, the 16th Conference of the States Parties placed all states which possess chemical weapons under an obligation to continue destroying them under international supervision and expand their reporting obligations.
The reason primarily given for the delays is that the environmentally sound destruction of stocks represents a greater financial and technological burden than originally assumed.
The NATO target is two per cent.
Do we have to do more?
From 11 to 12 April 2014, Foreign Minister Steinmeier travelled to Japan for his first official visit.
as high-level representatives of 12 countries working towards nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation via the NPDI Initiative are about to meet in their city.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier is one of them.
Before the conference starts, the group visits the Hiroshima Peace Memorial Park and lays flowers at the memorial for the victims of the 1945 nuclear bomb.
Here, the history of the dropping of the nuclear bomb on 6 August 1945 is impressively documented and the consequences for the city and its inhabitants are portrayed.
The museum houses a recreation of the “Atomic Bomb Dome” – a former exhibition hall for industrial goods belonging to the Chamber of Industry and Commerce.
Today it is a memorial in the city centre – the memory is still alive for the 1.2 million inhabitants, even in their daily lives.
one of whom is Ms Ogura – she was eight years old in 1945 and it is only due to chance that she survived.
The Ministers take these accounts with them to their talks during the NPDI Conference on Disarmament.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier considers Hiroshima to be a special venue:
O-TON voice over:
The international Non-Proliferation Treaty will be revised in 2015.
In a discussion between Foreign Minister Steinmeier and Japan’s Foreign Minister Kishida, the diplomatic efforts to de-escalate the situation in Ukraine are addressed – as are the tensions in East Asia.
In Tokyo the previous day, Foreign Minister Steinmeier had already had talks on security policy in East Asia.
Security and stability in East Asia were on the agenda again during his subsequent visit to Prime Minister Abe.
Steinmeier and Abe also had an in-depth discussion about the crisis in Ukraine and bilateral topics.
Close German-Japanese relations are to be further developed in the future.
The EU has supported the work of the OPCW since 2004 with several Joint Actions (2004, 2005 and 2007) and two Council Decisions (2009 and 2012) as part of the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP).
Iraq is working on conclusively destroying the remainder of its former chemical weapons stockpiles, which security considerations have so far prevented the OPCW from inspecting.
One focus is on projects to help a number of States Parties transpose their CWC obligations into national law.
In this way, the EU is helping prevent chemical weapons being used in terrorist attacks.
Another focus involves projects to promote the universal application of the CWC around the world.
A third is promoting cooperation in the chemicals sector for peaceful purposes and strengthening protection from chemical weapons.
It has supported the current UN and OPCW mission in Syria since April 2013 by providing two million euros, training for OPCW staff and air transport to Syria.
Between 2002 and 2014, Germany helped Russia destroy many of its chemical weapons through considerable financial support and joint projects as part of the G8 initiative Global Partnership.
Your predecessor favoured a “culture of restraint”.
To eliminate the chemical weapons in Libya, Germany has been providing the OPCW with logistical support in the verification of newly declared weapons and also helped build a destruction facility in Libya in collaboration with the US and Libya.
In Iraq, Germany is working on solutions to destroy the remaining stocks of Iraqi chemical weapons in conjunction with the OPCW.
Since its foundation, the Federal Republic of Germany has only ever possessed stockpiles of chemical weapons produced by the German Reich before 1945, which the CWC defines as “old chemical weapons”.
They had all been destroyed by April 2007.
Further “old chemical weapons” are still periodically found in the ground, however.
When they are, they are recorded by the Federal Armed Forces Verification Centre, reported to the OPCW and then destroyed at the GEKA in Munster.
The chemicals industry in Germany, like those of the other States Parties, is regularly inspected by the OPCW.
These inspection have been able to documented Germany’s effective implementation of and adherence to the CWC.
The Federal Office for Economic Affairs and Export Control collates the data on relevant chemicals produced by the German chemicals sector and prepares them for reporting to the OPCW.
I see no cause for such a debate.
You’re serving your second term as Federal Foreign Minister.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier in an interview with Die Zeit about the crisis in Ukraine, Russia’s role and whether sanctions make sense.
That must not set a precedent, either in Europe or anywhere else in the world.
Minister, Europe is experiencing its most dangerous crisis since the end of the Cold War.
It seemed out of the question that more than seven decades after the end of the Second World War we would be confronted within just a few weeks with a policy in which force is used to redraw borders.
Has force triumphed over law?
To date, the sanctions imposed by the West have been symbolic rather than anything else.
Will the annexation remain without consequences?
But there have already been consequences.
Nor can Russia convince itself that the annexation has been without consequences.
I believe Europe’s policy is the right one.
Firstly, because we have adopted a clear joint stance.
And secondly, because we’ve reacted intelligently rather than rashly to Russia’s actions.
Our three-phase sanctions leave the door open to tougher action and ensure that there are no obstacles in the way of a return to talks with Russia.
The Americans would have liked to proceed more quickly and further with the sanctions.
Why are you and the German Government putting on the brakes?
What actually happened was that in the end the Americans supported the European proposal of phased action and have continued along this path themselves.
We made our firm stance clear to Russia and reinforced this with sanctions.
Russia can be in no doubt that it will have to reckon with a strong reaction if it wants to go beyond Crimea.
By the way, I don’t believe that Russia is following a master plan with a prepared script.
Moscow is also driven by the jingoism which has been whipped up by the Russian leadership itself.
The deployment of Russian troops along the border with Ukraine is alarming, as are the images from eastern Ukraine.
However, what we’ve seen there so far is not a collapse of state authority.
And there are people with influence seeking to defuse the situation.
At any rate, the risk of a political division in Ukraine has not yet been banished.
We’ve made it clear to Russia that any activities beyond Crimea in eastern or southern Ukraine or in Moldova would be regarded by us as Moscow taking things to a new level, and that this would trigger the third phase of sanctions.
I know the country’s political leaders from many encounters and talks and therefore know that they have very different concerns and little interest in making the NATO issue, which is highly controversial in Ukraine, the subject of political debate.
To be quite honest, I share the view of the US President; I don’t believe Ukraine is heading for NATO membership.
Well, journalists are free to not ask questions.
After all, they don’t always tell us what’s not open to question for them.
When you ask me a question, I answer as I think fit.
NATO expanded eastwards even though it was aware of Russian sensibilities.
working together for a better Europe
Minister of State Roth and his Finnish counterpart Stubb
Talking with Alexander Stubb and Erkki Tuomioja, Roth emphasised the close and friendly cooperation between Germany and Finland on European issues.
The priority now, he said, was to ensure that Europe emerges stronger from the crisis.
Finland as role model
Finland, the Minister of State went on, was not only a strong and reliable partner, but in many regards also a role model in Europe.
There were and indeed still are sensibilities – especially in the case of Russia.
The Minister of State for Europe also talked about the importance of growth and employment in Europe:
Together we have successfully sought to ensure better protection for our fundamental values.
Now we must continue to demonstrate active commitment to growth and employment in Europe in order to strengthen social cohesion.
The two Ministers of State for Europe also discussed the current situation in Ukraine:
We are pulling in the same direction on the Ukraine crisis as well.
There must be no new rifts in Europe.
Common fight against youth unemployment
Afterwards he said:
Unfortunately, it wasn’t possible to discuss the different interests and expectations frankly and sincerely in the NATO-Russia Council.
Youth unemployment remains one of the most pressing problems facing Europe.
We must not leave any young people behind.
That means a commitment to shared values and the readiness to pursue a joint line.
Finland is setting high standards in this regard with its various projects.
Strengthen confidence in Europe
It's thus now a partner within the EU’s Neighbourhood Policy.
It was meant to be an alternative to, not preparation for membership.
What’s going on in Putin’s head?
Is he a nationalist or simply a power politician who pounces when he has the opportunity?
But even Putin’s critics in Moscow argue that he has felt misunderstood by the West time and again.
Disappointment has no role to play in foreign policy.
Agreement has already been reached on the OSCE observer mission, and if the Ukraine quartet consisting of Russia, Ukraine, the US and Europe now comes about then my proposals haven’t been that bad.
But it’s true to say that I’m disillusioned that 25 years after the end of the Cold War Europe is still unable to deal differently with unavoidable conflicts of interest.
I don’t know why some people are so keen to see cooperative political models fail.
That’s why I can’t understand why some are secretly rubbing their hands in glee.
I can only warn everyone not to throw the experiences from our history overboard.
He hasn’t done NATO a favour.
The Crimea crisis is therefore not an employment creation measure for NATO.
But NATO, too, has to look at itself and ascertain whether it has set the right priorities.
Does that mean an “as you were” and a return to traditional national defence in Europe after the discussions on global military operations?
We wanted to prevent people in our country coming to harm as a result of the further expansion of training camps for terrorists in Afghanistan.
It was about the security of Germany and its Alliance partners.
As we have to continue consolidating our finances, we can't fool ourselves: no pot of gold will miraculously appear to enable us to immediately increase our spending to two per cent.
We have to become more efficient and agree on a greater division of labour, just like the one in the sphere of air transport, which has been quite a success in NATO.
You yourself say that it isn’t possible to comment on world events “from the sidelines”.
I’ve nothing against a culture of restraint when it comes to military action.
All the parties in the German Bundestag share that view.
However, it seems to me that constantly repeating this principle has allowed the misunderstanding to arise that we have to be restrained not only in military terms but also in foreign policy.
I believe that’s wrong.
We’re a bit too big and also too important within the international community to merely observe the game from the sidelines and make clever comments.
Our partners expect more of us than we can deliver.
That’s why I decided just after taking up office that we would play an active role in the destruction of Syrian chemical weapons and in securing arms stockpiles in Libya. And the attempt undertaken together with Laurent Fabius and Radek Sikorski to end the bloodshed in Kyiv is also part of this.
Germany’s allies have appealed to Berlin time and again to do more in military terms.
Will you now give in to this pressure?
Anyone who believes that greater responsibility in foreign policy means more military missions is very much mistaken.
Of the remaining missions in which we’re taking part, the KFOR mission in the Balkans is by far the biggest.
I don’t see any kind of militarisation in that.
The Federal Chancellery has been in charge of European policy during the last few years. There has been little input from the Federal Foreign Office.
Is Europe part of the Chancellor’s remit?
Nevertheless, Europe’s lengthy economic stagnation has led it into a credibility crisis.
That undermines Europe as an idea.
We therefore have to ensure that Europe can be seen by everyone once more as a source of hope.
Secondly, we also have to counter the lack of credibility by ensuring that Europe grows closer together.
That’s not a task which anyone in Berlin could master on their own.
I believe other ministries alongside the Federal Chancellery have to play their part, including the Federal Foreign Office.
So, the Federal Foreign Office first of all had to fight its way back from insignificance?
And it’s not correct.
And we’ve ensured that people are listening.
I’d like to go a step further:
in the course of the next 12 months, we want to undertake the broadest possible review process in the Federal Foreign Office in conjunction with both experts and ordinary people throughout Germany. We want to ask ourselves and others questions and find new answers:
What is expected of a modern foreign policy?
I hope this will ignite a lively debate on the importance of foreign policy and, of course, also provide ideas and impetus for our work.
The first reason is obvious.
I was responsible for foreign policy for four years, and even enjoyed it, and I couldn’t accept that in the eyes of many foreign policy had lost some of its significance.
Secondly, there are a few things where I had the impression that I’d only just begun, projects which I wanted to continue.
Thirdly, I also wanted to ensure that Germany makes a more visible and active contribution to international politics.
Anyone who may have thought that foreign and security policy has become superfluous is wrong.
But we have to be more active in those areas where we can live up their expectations.
That’s a harsh judgement!
Following their talks he visited a vocational training centre and gave an address at the Finnish Institute of International Affairs.
Speech by Minister of State Roth at the Finnish Institute of International Affairs, 16 April 2014
We want to ensure that Europe continues to speak with one voice in the crisis and that the concerns and fears of all partners are taken into account.
German-Finnish partnership:
Minister of State for Europe Roth met his Finnish counterpart Stubb and Foreign Minister Tuomioja in Helsinki on 16 April.
Minister of State for Europe Michael Roth met his Finnish counterpart Alexander Stubb and Foreign Minister Erkki Tuomioja in Helsinki on 16 April.
Many other countries admired not only its education system, but also the level of gender equality and the country’s inclusive social policies, Roth continued.
During a visit to a vocational training centre in Helsinki, Roth spoke to young people and instructors.
In his address to the renowned Institute of International Affairs, Roth outlined how Finland and Germany can work together for a better Europe in order to restore the citizens’ confidence in the European integration project.
Click here to read Minister of State Roth’s speech in full.
Hundreds of visitors crossed the bridge that night, in both directions, to celebrate on both banks of the Oder.
free movement of persons.
Similar celebrations took place in many places across Europe that night, but particularly in the capitals of the new acceding states and at major border crossings.
Gerhard Schröder and Joschka Fischer signed the Treaty for Germany
The moves towards accession were supported by a broad-based EU financing programme.
The negotiations on accession which were launched with 10 states in 1997 were completed in 2002.
The Treaty of Accession was finally signed in Athens on 16 April 2003.
Referendums on accession
The actual Treaty is very brief and to the point:
it consists of just three articles, the rest of the details are regulated in various annexes.
There then follow seven pages with the signatures of all 15 EU member states plus the 10 candidate states.
Once it had been signed, the Treaty had to be ratified in all member states and candidate countries.
Peace and stability in Europe
Ten years on from eastern enlargement, it is difficult to imagine a European Union without Poland, Hungary or the Baltic states.
Treaty on Accession, 16 April 2003 (PDF, 158 KB)
Map of EU enlargement
No return to business as usual
Relations between the EU and Russia have experienced highs and lows during the last 15 years.
However, after years of growing economic cooperation with Russia and political cooperation which has not always been conflict-free but has been constant, I didn’t reckon with a return to the old patterns where geopolitical spaces are secured with military force.
Now we have to ensure that Russia’s conduct and its consequences don’t have a lasting influence on relations among Europe’s states.
No-one in Europe believes that we could simply return to business as usual in our dealings with Russia following the annexation of Crimea.
In political terms, the fact that it was clear from the votes in both the Security Council and the UN General Assembly that Russia’s policy is not even supported by many countries which normally align themselves with Moscow should make it stop to think.
However, this is not about issuing rival public statements and falling in with the media’s expectations. Rather, it’s about keeping our options open – in both directions, by the way – in the face of the escalation.
The negotiations on a contact group consisting of representatives from Ukraine, Russia, the EU and the US will show whether it has the desired effect.
No. I myself proposed that the contact group should not be made up of individual European states but that we should create an entity which is as small as possible, works behind closed doors and doesn’t have the appearance of a press conference at its very first meeting.
The number of observers hasn’t yet reached the target, but we are already receiving a lot more information on the situation on the ground.
Confrontations such as the one in Slavyansk, where people are said to have died or been injured, have huge potential for escalation.
It would be good if Russia would distance itself from the violent and illegal actions of pro-Russian demonstrators.
Looking back with hypothetical assumptions, going into the “what ifs”, is of no use to anyone.
But what matters most is that many Eastern European states which had been part of the Soviet Union or the Warsaw Pact wanted to join the Alliance.
Of course, the views of the people in any country which wants to join play a very important role, but so does the overall political situation.
When the Neighbourhood Policy was drawn up in the middle of the last decade, incidentally based on the experiences with the Orange Revolution, the idea was that we needed a separate European instrument for countries which were not prospective member states.
But, of course, the EU has never been a closed shop, nor will it become one in future – provided the EU retains its capacity to absorb new members.
The most important task now is to safeguard Ukraine’s national unity and provide it with every possible support to ensure its political and economic stability.
Isn’t there a danger that EU aid will be passed on directly to Gazprom?
It’s true that Russia holds all the cards and can make Ukraine’s life difficult, perhaps even impossible.
But if Moscow would analyse the situation rationally, it would realise that it has most to lose from a collapsed state on its western border.
Putin knows how to use power and is prepared to be tough – both at home and abroad.
I think there is no justification for using force to redraw borders, thereby opening a Pandora’s box with unforeseeable consequences.
The erosion of the principle of territorial integrity in favour of a supposed right to self-determination for ethnic groups could ultimately pose the greatest threat to Russia itself as a multi-ethnic state.
Opposing foreign policy philosophies are clashing with full force and preventing us from reaching out to each other: on the one hand we have the geopolitical thinking prevalent in the 19th century, focusing on spheres of influence, while here in Europe we have largely overcome nationalist thinking and have voluntarily relinquished some of our sovereignty in favour of European integration.
Putin called the collapse of the Soviet Union the “greatest disaster of the 20th century”.
There are many indications that he doesn’t believe Russia has been treated with sufficient respect, either politically or economically.
Confrontation and self-isolation are not the way forward and they won’t solve anything.
The crisis is serious and the risk of a new division forming in Europe is far from over.
We have to remain level-headed when others lose control of themselves.
Has Putin unwittingly done NATO a favour by annexing part of Ukraine, thus ridding it of the identity crisis it suffered during the last few years?
But he’s helped us Europeans to re-discover the significance of foreign and security policy.
The current crisis shows that our seemingly viable security architecture built up over decades must be constantly bolstered and renewed.
The mission in Afghanistan after 9/11 wasn’t prompted by our desire to bestow our ideas of democracy, freedom and security on people all over the world.
It was launched at a time in which more than 3000 Americans had been killed in an Islamist attack and Europe feared that similar attacks could take place here.
And attacks really did take place in London and Madrid.
Germany spends 1.4 per cent of its economic output on defence.
Most NATO member states fall far short of this self-imposed target, including us.
What has to change in Germany’s foreign policy in concrete terms?
The facts tell a different story: we’ll be bringing 3000 troops home from Afghanistan before the end of 2014.
Far fewer troops participate in other mandates, especially in Africa. Our focus is very much on training.
We have reason to hope that we will manage to overcome Europe’s economic crisis.
That’s why we’ve strengthened our policy on Europe.
I believe that the Federal Foreign Office has something to offer and that it has to be heard.
Do we have the right resources in a world of new complexities?
Why was it so important for you to return to the Federal Foreign Office?
In economic terms, it has led to a slump in Moscow’s financial markets, the rouble’s fall in value and a dramatically accelerating capital flight.
Germany is not part of the contact group which is meeting for the first time in Geneva this Thursday.
Geneva Statement on Ukraine:
On 17 April Federal Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement on the talks in Geneva:
The foreign ministers of Ukraine, Russia and the United States and the EU High Representative agreed on concrete, practical steps to de-escalate tensions.
I was shocked by the news of the tragic ferry accident off the island of Jeju in South Korea.
We grieve for the many people who lost their lives when the Sewol sank and hope that there are survivors to be found amongst those still missing.
We are particularly distressed by the deaths of young pupils who were on an excursion together.
In Germany, we feel deep sympathy for the great suffering of the relatives and the country as a whole.
An important step has been taken
But we have regained the chance to avoid a division of Ukraine and for all regions of Ukraine to shape the country’s economic and political future.
The outcome from Geneva deserves respect.
The OSCE, as an independent observer directly on the ground, is to play a leading role in implementing these measures.
But the litmus test is still to come.
“Peace has not yet been achieved in Ukraine, and we still have a very long way to go.
Now it must be shown that the steps agreed in Geneva do not just remain a list on a piece of paper but have a tangible impact on policy.”
The participants agreed on the renunciation of violence, the disarmament of illegal groups, the clearance of illegally seized buildings and the granting of an amnesty.
Geneva Statement on Ukraine of 17 April 2014
Human Rights Commissioner visits Africa
Foreign Minister Steinmeier on the ferry disaster in South Korea
Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement today (18 April) on the ferry disaster in South Korea:
Human Rights Commissioner Strässer visits South Sudan, Uganda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
In South Sudan he will visit a camp for internally displaced persons (IDP camp) and meet the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General for UNMISS, Toby Lanzer, who is responsible for coordinating humanitarian assistance and development aid.
The Union for the Mediterranean
1995 Euro-Mediterranean Conference in Barcelona
Participants and Goals
The Union for the Mediterranean aims to promote economic integration and democratic reform in the Euro-Mediterranean area.
Christoph Strässer will also visit refugee camps and a hospital for victims of sexual violence.
The Union for the Mediterranean is the only forum outside the United Nations in which the Arab countries and Israel regularly meet.
Project areas
The declaration adopted at the summit establishing the Union for the Mediterranean highlighted six priority areas:
De-pollution of the Mediterranean
Development of maritime and land highways
Civil protection
Alternative energies; Mediterranean Solar Plan
Higher education and research
Projects are coordinated by the Secretariat in Barcelona.
It primarily supports the implementation of regional projects in the above areas.
These include, for example, the Trans-Magreb Motorway Axis, which is to form a continuous road corridor along the North African coast from Morocco to Tunisia.
Meetings at the foreign ministry and with a member of parliament are also planned.
The Human Rights Commissioner will then travel to eastern Congo and to Kinshasa.
Here, too, the humanitarian situation, especially in eastern Congo, will be the focus of attention.
The Anna Lindh Foundation
The programme includes talks with Martin Kobler, Head of MONUSCO, and German NGOs working in the field of humanitarian assistance.
In Kinshasa the Commissioner will hold talks with government representatives, human rights defenders and members of parliament.
The Anna Lindh Euro-Mediterranean Foundation (based in Alexandria) was established in April 2005 and transferred to the Union for the Mediterranean in 2008.
The Foundation’s aim is to foster exchange between cultural and civil society networks.
The Foundation’s mission includes overcoming stereotypes and misunderstandings, supporting civil society and promoting mutual respect, cultural diversity and peaceful co-existence.
The network is coordinated by one organisation in each member state, in Germany by the Goethe-Institut together with a network partner.
Following the Arab Spring, the Foundation’s work is important in supporting civil society and fostering cultural and social exchange between Europe and the southern Mediterranean countries.
Germany, France, Sweden and Spain are its biggest donors.
The Anna Lindh Foundation
Goethe-Institut
China’s Prime Minister Li Keqiang welcomes Frank-Walter Steinmeier to Beijing.
Monk cleaning a Buddha statue in an Indian monastery
Freedom of religious or belief encompasses many different rights
From 12 to 14 April the German Foreign Minister is undertaking his first official visit here.
During talks with his Chinese counterpart Wang Yi Foreign Minister Steinmeier discusses current foreign policy challenges as well as bilateral issues.
Steinmeier also expresses his concern about the tensions in the East Asian region.
The expansion of economic relations and human rights dialogue are also on the agenda.
Despite the numerous international legal instruments developed to protect this human right, freedom of religion or belief is subject to restrictions in many parts of the world.
At the joint press conference following the meeting Wang describes Germany as the “pacesetter” for China’s relations with Europe.
In some countries only members of a particular religion may hold high national office.
In many parts of the world people may be denied equal rights or be discriminated against by reason of their religion or beliefs.
In the past the industrial region was often mentioned in connection with the air pollution in Beijing and its environs.
After a good hour’s ride he arrives in the provincial capital, which is now home to more than ten million people.
Meetings are co-presided over by the North (represented by the European External Action Service and European Commission) and the South (represented by Jordan) to ensure a balanced representation of interests.
These issues have become even more central following the political changes that have swept through the Arab world.
The ministerial meetings held in 2013 and 2014 on topics such as the empowerment of women, transport, energy and industry show that regional cooperation in this forum is effective despite the existing political differences.
Projects to promote employment and the use of renewable energy are also contributing greatly to regional development.
Such violence may be prompted not only by religious motives but also by socio-economic disparities.
It is therefore important to analyse exactly what is behind attacks on a given religious minority before deciding on measures to give them better protection.
Rohingya refugees in Myanmar
In the political arena the universal validity of freedom of religion or belief as a human right has often been queried.
The first stop in Hebei is the province’s government guesthouse.
In its 1990 Cairo Declaration on Human Rights in Islam, the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) made the validity and enjoyment of human rights subject to the tenets of Sharia and among other things denied individuals the right to convert to another religion.
At a meeting with the Party Secretary Steinmeier discusses the massive structural change in the region.
So-called blasphemy laws may make freedom of expression on religious matters a punishable offence and prescribe severe penalties (including even the death penalty) for the crime of “apostasy”.
Afterwards, Foreign Minister Steinmeier visits a pilot project run by the German Energy Agency (DENA),
a research centre for energy-efficient building which is still under construction.
During the tour of the project exhibition representatives of German firms and the DENA Chief Executive report on the various projects.
These include a joint venture from Brandenburg, the partner region.
The situation of Christian minorities is a special focus here.
The German Bundestag, too, views protecting freedom of religion or belief as a matter of high priority.
These offer many opportunities, also for German enterprises, according to Foreign Minister Steinmeier.
China is also recognising that growth is not everything, and that what is important is to improve people’s quality of life.
To achieve this we need to invest in environmental protection now.
And if we can also use our mutual relations to support this goal, that can only be a good thing.
As well as holding talks with high-ranking representatives of the South Sudanese government, Christoph Strässer will also meet the Chair of the South Sudan Human Rights Commission as well as representatives of NGOs in the country and German humanitarian NGOs to discuss the human rights and humanitarian situation there.
The talks in Uganda will centre on the recently adopted Anti-Homosexuality Bill.
The Human Rights Commissioner will speak to Ugandan LGBTI activitists, the Uganda Human Rights Commission and representatives of German foundations and NGOs about the human rights situation and specifically the status of LGBTI persons in Uganda.
General Assembly resolution (A/RES/68/170)
In 2011 a basis was also laid at the Human Rights Council for greater cooperation between the EU and the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) in matters relating to freedom of religion or belief.
The OIC agreed to drop “defamation of religions” as the resolution’s title as well as its demand for defamation of religions to be legally defined as a violation of human rights.
He visits the historical Longxing-Si monastery and temple; which dates back to before the Ming Dynasty.
Here in Zhending the Foreign Minister stops briefly at a small market.
To conclude his visit to Hebei province he visits the southern city gate and the city walls.
For the last appointment of his visit, Steinmeier meets an old acquaintance.
State Councillor Yang Jiechi was Steinmeier’s opposite number during his first term of office.
OIC-sponsored Human Rights Council resolution (A/HRC/25/L.41)
Now the two politicians once again engage in intensive discussion on foreign policy issues.
The next Sino-German intergovernmental consultations are already scheduled
to take place in Germany in October.
Priorities of Sino-German cooperation include energy efficiency, sustainable construction, environmental protection and high technology.
Similarly worded resolutions are also sponsored by the OIC in the UN General Assembly, most recently at its 68th session (adoption by consensus):
Europe – Dream and Reality
Freedom of religion or belief
Promoting freedom of religion or belief around the world is an important part of Germany’s human rights policy.
In the view of both Germany and the European Union, this right is of crucial importance also in the work of the United Nations.
Promoting freedom of religion or belief around the world is an important part of Germany’s human rights policy.
Despite the numerous international legal instruments developed to protect this human right, freedom of religion or belief remains under threat or subject to restrictions.
In the view of both Germany and the European Union, this right is of crucial importance also in the work of the United Nations.
Freedom of religion or belief is a right enshrined in a large number of United Nations (UN) resolutions and international agreements, including the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the 1966 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the UN’s 1981 Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief.
Freedom of religion or belief includes the freedom of everyone to have or to adopt a religion or belief of their choice, and freedom, either individually or in community with others, to manifest their religion or belief without interference.
It also includes the freedom to change one’s religion as well as the freedom to not adhere to any religion or system of belief.
Universal Declaration of Human Rights of 1948
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights of 1966
UN Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief of 1981
Many restrictions around the world
Attacks on and persecution of religious minorities or the exploitation of what is alleged to be religiously motivated violence to serve political ends are unfortunately in some areas a common occurrence.
There have also been attempts to make freedom of religion a collective right rather than an individual right. If this right is vested not in the individual but in the religious community, the community would then have the right to determine for the individual adherent the scope of and any limits to such freedom.
Restrictions on freedom of opinion may also be used to curtail freedom of religion or belief.
In many countries blasphemy, for example, is a punishable offence.
Activities in Germany and the EU
Germany views freedom of religion or belief as a matter of vital importance.
In our bilateral political dialogue with third countries the German Government seeks, like our EU partners, to advance and protect freedom of religion or belief.
We provide systematic support for projects designed to enhance universal respect for freedom of religion or belief, including notably intercultural dialogue programmes aimed at promoting better understanding between people of different faiths.
The coalition agreement between Germany’s current ruling parties highlights the importance of universal protection of freedom of religion and belief and emphasises the need for solidarity with religious minorities who are disadvantaged and repressed.
Coptic Christians in Berlin protesting against the situation in Egypt (October 2011)
In July 2008, for example, it held a parliamentary enquiry on how best to protect freedom of religion or belief as well as plenary debates on the issue in June and December 2010. In November 2010 the Bundestag Committee on Human Rights and Humanitarian Aid conducted a hearing on freedom of religion or belief.
At EU level, protecting freedom of religion or belief is an issue that features regularly in EU Council Conclusions, declarations and demarches.
In June 2013 the Foreign Affairs Council of the European Union adopted EU Guidelines on the promotion and protection of freedom of religion or belief, which provide EU delegations and member states’ missions abroad with practical guidance for their work in this area.
EU Human Rights Working Group (COHOM)
Activities at UN level
Since August 2010 German national Prof. Heiner Bielefeldt from the Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg has been the UN Human Rights Council’s Special Rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief.
His mandate is to promote action at national, regional and international level designed to ensure the enjoyment and protection of the right to freedom of religion or belief, to identify by means of country missions and thematic reports any existing or emerging obstacles to its enjoyment as well as to investigate relevant incidents and government action and present recommendations in this connection.
At UN level the EU has since 2004 regularly sponsored both in the Third Committee of the General Assembly and in the Human Rights Council resolutions on freedom of religion or belief.
The most recent resolutions were both adopted by consensus in the UN General Assembly on 18 November 2013 and in the Human Rights Council on 27 March 2014.
For many years the OIC regularly sponsored in UN bodies a rival resolution to the aforementioned EU resolution.
Human Rights Council resolution (A/HRC/25/L.19)
The OIC resolution reflected the heated debate between the Islamic and the Western world which arose in the wake of 9/11 and the cartoons controversy in February 2006 over the importance of religion and its protection. Owing to its bias towards Islam, the EU refused to support the resolution.
In March 2011 discussions at the Human Rights Council indicated that the entrenched positions of both sides were beginning to soften.
It tabled instead a resolution text calling for efforts to combat negative stereotyping and religious hatred.
In this way a resolution on these issues could for the first time be adopted by consensus.
The most recent OIC resolution in this connection was adopted by the Human Rights Council on 27 March 2014:
In May 2012 the Bundestag Committee on Human Rightsalso held a public hearing on the situation of Christians and other minorities in the Middle East and North Africa.
As well as Poland, the other countries joining the European Union on 1 May 2004 were Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Slovakia and Slovenia,
making the EU’s eastern enlargement the largest round of enlargement to date.
This largest round of enlargement in the EU’s history was marked by public celebrations at many border crossings and in the European capitals.
As midnight struck to herald 1 May 2014, Europe’s anthem “Ode to Joy” rang out from huge loudspeakers in Frankfurt and Slubice, two towns on opposite sides of the river Oder, and fireworks exploded in the night sky.
Then Germany’s Foreign Minister at the time, Joschka Fischer, and his Polish colleague Wlodzimierz Cimoszewicz symbolically opened the border point at the Oder Bridge which links the two towns.
It may not have occurred to them as they partied that they were also exercising one of the European Union’s fundamental freedoms,
Largest round of enlargement in the EU’s history
in the early 1990s, after the end of the Cold War, the EU concluded Association Agreements with many central and eastern European states with the aim of liberalising trade, developing guidelines for political dialogue and harmonising national laws and regulations with EU law.
the EU’s eastern enlargement
The European Union’s eastern enlargement
The Treaty of Accession regulated the EU’s enlargement to allow 10 eastern European countries to become members of the European Union on 1 May 2004.
In many places this largest round of enlargement in the EU’s history was marked by public celebrations.
The Treaty of Accession regulated the EU’s enlargement to allow 10 eastern European countries to become members of the European Union on 1 May 2004.
The accession of these 10 countries to the EU not only increased free movement of persons and freedom of travel: above all it made an important contribution to peace and stability in central and eastern Europe.
Looking ahead
The “eastern enlargement project” had begun a long time before:
Referendums were held in most of the candidate states; in some cases (e.g. Slovenia and Slovakia) over 90% of the population voted in favour of EU accession.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier spoke to the “Bild am Sonntag” newspaper about the situation in Ukraine.
Published on 20 April 2014.
We shouldn’t start to downplay what has been achieved yet again.
Now the task is to implement the agreed goals.
The OSCE mission, which Germany is participating in, will monitor the process.
Strässer visits South Sudan, Uganda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Refugees in South Sudan
He wants to gain an insight into the human rights and humanitarian situation on the ground.
situation of internally displaced persons
In South Sudan Strässer is first visiting a camp for internally displaced persons (IDP) and is meeting representatives of South Sudanese and German non-governmental organisations (NGOs).
Furthermore, the Human Rights Commissioner will meet the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General for UNMISS, Toby Lanzer, who is responsible for coordinating humanitarian assistance and development aid.
During his visit, Strässer also wants to hold talks with the Chair of the South Sudan Human Rights Commission, Lawrence Korbandy.
LGBTI rights
The Human Rights Commissioner’s talks in the town on the shores of Lake Victoria will take place against the backdrop of the recently adopted Anti-Homosexuality Bill.
Strässer had already strongly condemned the bill immediately after it was signed by President Yoweri Museveni, calling on the Ugandan state to protect all citizens from violence, marginalisation, discrimination and arbitrary punishment.
You can read the full statement made by Christoph Strässer here.
In Entebbe the Commissioner will meet Ugandan LGBTI activists, the Ugandan Human Rights Commission and representatives of German foundations and NGOs.
He wants to speak to them about the human rights situation and in particular the status of LGBTI persons in Uganda.
victims of sexual violence
UN soldiers protect the civilian population in eastern Congo
To end his trip, Strässer is travelling to eastern Congo and Kinshasa.
Here, too, the humanitarian situation will be the focus of attention, especially in eastern Congo.
The programme includes talks with Martin Kobler, Head of MONUSCO, and German NGOs working in the field of humanitarian assistance.
In addition to this, Strässer will visit a refugee camp and a hospital for victims of sexual violence.
In Kinshasa, the Commissioner will hold further talks with Government representatives, human rights defenders and members of parliament.
Humanitarian assistance in South Sudan
When will real economic sanctions be imposed?
We have already debated the question of sanctions at great length.
The questions were put by Angelika Hellemann.
But one thing is certain:
The Union for the Mediterranean was established during a formal summit in Paris on 13 July 2008.
It provides an enhanced framework for the EU’s Mediterranean policy, which was launched at the Euro-Mediterranean Foreign Ministers Conference in Barcelona in 1995 (which is why it was originally known as the Barcelona Process).
The Union for the Mediterranean brings together all EU states, the countries bordering the southern Mediterranean, as well as Jordan and Mauritania.
the Mediterranean Business Development Initiative
More than 4000 organisations from the current 42 member states have now joined together to pursue joint projects.
The Anna Lindh Foundation is financed in equal parts from EU funds and its partners’ voluntary contributions.
Implement agreed goals now
Pro-Russian militants in Eastern Ukraine refuse to give up their arms and vacate the buildings they have occupied.
It was obvious that the Geneva accord would not restore peace in Ukraine overnight.
I sometimes wish that the same energy that has been put into the debate on sanctions would also be expended on not aggravating the situation.
Now what’s important is putting the accord into practice.
This won’t be easy, as we are also dealing with groups who don’t listen to Kyiv or to Moscow.
We won’t have many more chances to end this peacefully.
US President Obama and Germany’s Minister of Defence von der Leyen are threatening to impose harsher sanctions on Russia.
The hard-won agreement reached in Geneva represents a chance to de-escalate the conflict and it has to be used.
From 22 to 30 April the Federal Government’s Human Rights Commissioner is travelling to Africa in order to gain an insight into the humanitarian situation on the ground.
The Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid at the Federal Foreign Office, Christoph Strässer, is travelling to South Sudan, Uganda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo from 22 to 30 April.
On 23 April, Strässer is travelling from Juba in South Sudan to Entebbe in Uganda.
Congo –
Protection of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex people
Humanitarian assistance in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Sino-German relations, which are already very good, are to be extended still further in all areas.
The main focus is on efforts to find a diplomatic solution for the crisis in Ukraine.
During the visit Foreign Minister Steinmeier also goes on a day trip from Beijing to Hebei province.
Both politicians highlight the partnership between Hebei and Land Brandenburg in Germany.
The German Foreign Minister is also able to gain a first-hand impression of Hebei’s culture and society.
In the evening he takes the train back to Beijing.
Shaping European foreign policy together
Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Fabius will hold joint talks in Europe’s eastern and southern neighbourhoods from 23 to 25 April.
To begin with they are travelling to the Republic of Moldova on Wednesday.
How should the West respond?
We are providing manpower and money for the mission in Eastern Ukraine, and are working to see that the full mission strength of 500 observers is reached as soon as possible.
Reproduced by kind permission of the Axel Springer-Verlag.
On his first official visit to China since resuming office, Steinmeier visited the capital Beijing from 12 to 14 April and travelled to Hebei province by high-speed train.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier on his joint trip with Foreign Minister Fabius of France
Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement in Berlin today (23 April) before departing with France’s Foreign Minister Fabius on a joint trip to Moldova, Georgia, Tunisia and Paris:
As the crisis in Ukraine continues, we are travelling to Moldova and Georgia to gain an impression of the situation on the ground.
The clock is ticking.
While a lot of political energy is currently being directed towards our Eastern partners, we should not lose sight of our neighbours to the south.
The revolutions in the Arab world were sparked, more than three years ago, in Tunis.
The courage and determination of the people in Tunisia merit our full support.
In commemorating the First World War, we look not only to the past but, without question, to the future too.
Moldova and Georgia against the backdrop of the crisis in Ukraine
Foreign Minister Steinmeier had received Leănca in Berlin recently as part of his first official visit.
Before his trip, Foreign Minister Steinmeier said:
In the midst of the crisis we are travelling to Moldova and Georgia in order to gain an insight into the situation on the ground.
We take the deep concern of our eastern partners about the events in their neighbour Ukraine very seriously.
Breathing life into the Geneva accord
Steinmeier went on to say the following with reference to the crisis in Ukraine:
Further talks are planned with the Speaker of the Parliament, Davit Usupashvili, and the Opposition Leader, David Bakradze.
full support for courage and determination
On Thursday, Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Fabius are travelling on to Tunisia together.
He recalled that the 2011 uprisings in the Arab world had started in Tunisia.
Tunisia is to date the only country in the region that has managed to take important steps towards democracy and a strong civil society.
In Tunis the two Foreign Ministers will first meet with President Moncef Marzouki.
Further talks with interim Prime Minister Mehdi Jomaa are on the agenda.
On Friday, after a joint visit to a project in greater Tunis, the Foreign Ministers of Germany and France will have the chance to talk to Mustafa Ben Jaafar, Speaker of the Constituent Assembly, as well as to representatives of political parties.
Joint event for the year of commemoration
Speaking about the event, Foreign Minister Steinmeier made it clear that in the year of commemoration it was also important to “expressly look to the future”.
“Germany and France want to remember together and to shape the future together”, according to Steinmeier.
The journalist Michaela Wiegel is moderating the event.
Country information Moldova
Country information Georgia
Country information Tunisia
The horrific consequences of that time when diplomacy failed spell out a warning and make our duty clear.
Germany and France want to remember together and to shape the future together.
Between 23 and 25 April, Foreign Ministers Frank-Walter Steinmeier and Laurent Fabius will be engaging in extensive talks with high-level representatives of Governments and opposition parties in Chisinau, Tbilisi and Tunis.
State visit to Turkey
Foreign Ministers Frank-Walter Steinmeier and Laurent Fabius will hold joint talks in Europe’s eastern and southern neighbourhoods from 23 to 25 April.
At the Franco-German Council of Ministers in Paris in February, the two Foreign Ministers had announced that they would make joint trips to further strengthen Franco-German cooperation on foreign policy issues.
The primary aim was to actively shape European foreign policy together, he said.
To this end, Steinmeier and Fabius will hold comprehensive talks with high-level government and opposition representatives in Chisinau, Tbilisi and Tunis.
Flags of the city of Chisinau, Moldova and the EU
On Wednesday the Foreign Ministers are first travelling to the Republic of Moldova.
In Chisinau, a discussion with Prime Minister Iurie Leănca is on the agenda.
Steinmeier and Fabius will also meet the Party Chairpersons of the Governing Coalition and Opposition Leader Vladimir Voronin.
On Thursday the trip continues with joint meetings in Georgia’s capital Tbilisi.
There, Steinmeier and Fabius are meeting President Giorgi Margvelashvili, Prime Minister Irakli Gharibashvili and Foreign Minister Maia Panjikidze for consultations.
In Berlin, Foreign Minister Steinmeier had received his Georgian counterpart just two weeks ago for her first official visit.
Moreover, within the framework of the visit, the German Embassy in Tunis’ new chancery will be inaugurated by Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Fabius and their Tunisian counterpart, Mongi Hamdi.
To end their joint trip in the European neighbourhood, Steinmeier and Fabius are travelling to Paris on Friday evening.
Under the title “Of the Failure of and Need for Diplomacy – is Europe today Safe from the Mistakes of 1914?”, and following their introductory statements, both Foreign Ministers are having a discussion with the historians Prof.
Franco-German Council of Ministers:
specific steps to strengthen cooperation between the Foreign Ministers
The Federal President also wishes to pay tribute to Turkey’s readiness to shelter Syrian refugees.
Germany and France are continuing to do all we can to help de-escalate the conflict in Ukraine.
We are agreed that all possible diplomatic means need to be brought into play in order to translate the Geneva statement into reality.
The focus in Paris will be on attending the event 1914-2014: Of the Failure of and the Need for Diplomacy in joint commemoration of the First World War.
Each new escalation will make the conflict more and more difficult to resolve.
Various political talks with President Gül and Prime Minister Erdoğan are scheduled.
At Ankara’s Middle East Technical University (METU) Gauck is due to give a speech.
Gauck will also meet with representatives of Turkish civil society.
His visit to Turkey will be Gauck’s first opportunity to meet President Gül in an official capacity.
In 2013 the Federal Foreign Office launched the German Partnership Program for Excellence in Biological and Health Security to implement long-term biosecurity projects in various countries under the auspices of the Global Partnership.
Robert Koch Institute (RKI)
Friedrich Loeffler Institute, Federal Research Institute for Animal Health (FLI)
Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Fabius are holding joint talks in Europe’s eastern and southern neighbourhoods from 23 to 25 April.
To begin with they travelled to the Republic of Moldova.
Steinmeier, Leanca and Fabius
To begin with they travelled to the Republic of Moldova on Wednesday.
Steinmeier and Fabius following their arrival in Chisinau
Foreign Ministers Frank-Walter Steinmeier and Laurent Fabius are holding joint talks in Europe’s eastern and southern neighbourhoods from 23 to 25 April.
On Wednesday the Foreign Ministers travelled to the Republic of Moldova.
On 27 April Gauck will visit a camp for Syrian refugees in Kahramanmaraş as well as the Bundeswehr unit serving in the region.
President Gül was last in Germany on a state visit in September 2011.
From 26 to 29 April Federal President Joachim Gauck and his partner Daniela Schadt will pay a state visit to the Republic of Turkey.
The main focus of the visit will be the rule of law and fundamental freedoms as well as the dynamic way Turkish society is changing.
On 28 April he will be received by President Gül in Ankara with military honours.
On 29 April Presidents Gauck and Gül will jointly inaugurate the German-Turkish University in Istanbul.
talks with the Government and the Opposition
Before his trip, Foreign Minister Steinmeier had already said:
Following this, Steinmeier and Fabius also met the Party Chairpersons of the Governing Coalition and Opposition Leader Vladimir Voronin.
Moldova –
showing solidarity
Here, Steinmeier and Fabius want to show support and solidarity:
Foreign Minister Steinmeier had received Leanca in Berlin at the beginning of April as part of his first official visit.
In a joint press conference following the meeting, Steinmeier stated that Moldova could count on the partnership with the EU.
The preparations for the signing of the EU Association Agreement are in full swing.
Joint press conference in Chisinau
Message to Kyiv and Moscow
With reference to the crisis in Ukraine, the Ministers from Germany and France re-emphasised that “diplomacy and dialogue” were the only solutions – this was their “joint message to Kyiv and Moscow”.
At the beginning of his trip, Foreign Minister Steinmeier made it clear that despite the current difficult situation in the East of Europe, we should not forget about the southern partnership.
in June an Association Agreement between the European Union (EU) and the Republic of Moldova is due to be signed and moreover the visa requirement for Moldovan citizens entering the EU will be lifted in the coming week.
The Association Agreement between the EU and the Republic of Moldova would now be signed soon, he said.
Every day that passes with increasing violence, a growing number of occupations of public buildings – as was the case last weekend – each of these days makes it harder to reach a solution.
Jean-Jacques Becker and Dr Arndt Weinrich.
The injured Ukrainians are carefully taken out of the Bundeswehr MedEvac airplane
Costs for the treatment are assumed by the Federal Foreign Office, the Federal Ministry of Defence and the Victor Pinchuk Foundation in Ukraine.
Thereupon, the Federal Government pledged to support Ukraine in caring for the injured:
“Germany and France continue to do all they can to help de-escalate the conflict in Ukraine. We agree that all diplomatic options must be drawn upon now to breathe life into the Geneva accord. The clock is ticking. Every further escalation makes it harder to resolve the conflict.”
Some patients already released from hospital
Ambulances took the injured straight to hospitals in Berlin
Year of commemoration 2014 – a task for German foreign policy
To end their trip, on Friday evening both Ministers are taking part in a Franco-German panel discussion in Paris in remembrance of the First World War.
The trilateral youth exchange programme between Germany, France and Moldova is also set to be strengthened.
Georgia:
Within the context of the events of the commemorative year of 2014, a Franco-German panel discussion on the First World War is taking place in Palais Beauharnais, the German Ambassador’s residence.
There are Maidan activists as well as police officers among the injured.
Costs for the treatment are assumed by the Victor Pinchuk Foundation in Ukraine, the Federal Foreign Office and the Federal Ministry of Defence.
Injured Ukrainians to be treated in Germany (12 March 2014)
Geneva Statement on Ukraine (17 April 2014)
but also to strengthen the health services of our partner countries in Africa, Central Asia and South America, thus enhancing their national security.
Bundeswehr Institute of Microbiology
Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine (BNI-TM)
Medical care for 32 injured Ukrainians in Germany 32 Ukrainian nationals have received medical care in German hospitals following violent protests on the Maidan in Kyiv.
Medical care for 32 injured Ukrainians in Germany
32 Ukrainian nationals have received medical care in German hospitals following violent protests on the Maidan in Kyiv. Some seriously injured persons are still in treatment.
During the violent protests in Kyiv’s Independence Square on 18 and 20 February, nearly one hundred people lost their lives and many more were severely injured.
On 12 March, 32 patients arrived in Berlin by Bundeswehr airplane and, from there, were taken to several hospitals in Berlin, Ulm and Constance for treatment.
Nine of the injured Ukrainians have already been discharged from hospital, four others are presently awaiting their release.
However, some patients will have to remain in Germany for treatment for considerably longer because they are too seriously injured, especially due to gunshot or shell splinter wounds.
Diplomatic efforts to end the crisis in Ukraine are flanked by the Federal Government’s humanitarian commitment which comes in response to the Ukrainian parliament’s appeal to the German Embassy in Kyiv to support Ukraine in caring for and treating people severely injured in the violent clashes.
Bild: The city of Odessa; Ukraine is an ENP partner
Fostering close and amicable relations between the European Union and its neighbours has always been a key priority for Germany’s foreign policy.
The European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) was developed parallel to the 2004 enlargement of the EU, with considerable input from Germany, to promote prosperity, security, stability as well as rule-of-law and democratic structures in the countries bordering on the enlarged EU.
Although Russia is also an immediate neighbour of the EU, European-Russian relations are handled within the scope of a strategic partnership.
Promoting reform in Europe’s neighbourhood
To this end, the EU is providing financial backing and encouraging greater economic integration, closer political dialogue, as well as deeper sectoral cooperation with and among partner countries.
While the ENP in no way prejudges the way a partner country’s relations with the EU may develop under the relevant provisions of the EU Treaty,
it offers no direct accession perspective.
The key to the ENP’s success is rather the enhanced cooperation it offers in advancing reform processes under way in Europe’s neighbourhood.
A changing neighbourhood – the new-look ENP 2011
In 2011, in response to the changes taking place in the EU’s neighbourhood, the ENP was revamped with a view to providing more targeted support for the transition processes under way there.
In May 2011 the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and the European Commission published a Joint Communication entitled “A New Response to a Changing Neighbourhood”.
“The new approach”, it states, “must be based on mutual accountability and a shared commitment to the universal values of human rights, democracy and the rule of law”.
The aim of this new approach, which also has the backing of the German Government, is to give partners greater support in developing more democracy, sustainable economic development and cross-border links.
The idea is that EU support for its neighbours should in future be more closely linked to conditions.
The more progress a country makes on reform, the more support it will receive (more for more).
If a country fails to make any progress, the EU will review its support.
And where the EU has taken targeted political measures against governments which violate human rights and democratic principles, it will not only maintain but also step up its support for civil society in those countries.
The agreements with Georgia and Moldova were initialled at the Summit in Vilnius (28 to 29 November 2013) and should be signed by the end of June.
Interested partners are to be offered the prospect of closer trade relations designed to pave the way for enhanced and more comprehensive free trade zones and greater market access.
In its conclusions of June 2011, the Foreign Affairs Council reaffirmed the goal of enhanced cooperation with civil society and closer collaboration in the education sphere.
Proposals for mobility partnerships, enhanced sectoral cooperation and the participation of partners in EU programmes and agencies also met with approval.
Current challenges
With regard to the agreement with Ukraine, the political section was signed on 21 March 2014 and the free trade section is due to be signed after the presidential elections in May.
In the ENP Package (consisting of a communication from the Commission and the High Representative on the implementation of the ENP as well as progress reports on individual partner countries) published in March 2014, the Commission and the European External Action Service concluded that the Neighbourhood Policy has produced mixed results in the third year after the ENP was revamped in 2011.
It was found that in 2013 some progress had been made in attaining the aims pursued.
The reform efforts in the eastern and southern ENP countries had been continued and supported by the EU.
However, the growing security problems in some countries had also led to unfavourable developments.
On 4 and 5 October 2013 the Republic of Moldova hosted the Civil Society Forum, becoming the first of the partner countries to do so.
The Lithuanian European Union presidency made the Eastern Partnership one of its priorities.
They call for the ENP to be adapted in reaction to the sweeping changes in the EU’s eastern and southern neighbourhood.
Steinmeier and Fabius in Georgia and Moldova
After starting their trip in the Republic of Moldova they travelled on to Georgia.
In concrete terms, the ENP is implemented first and foremost via Action Plans for individual ENP partners.
Action Plans are political documents spelling out the reform agendas agreed between the EU and the relevant partner country.
The Commission takes stock of what headway has been made in annual progress reports.
According to the new-look ENP, Action Plans should identify specific reform targets; EU support is conditional on these targets being met.
The formal legal prerequisite for such a Plan is the existence of valid partnership and cooperation or association agreements with the EU.
Prime Minister Gharibashvili and Foreign Minister Panjikdze with their guests
To this end, Steinmeier and Fabius are holding comprehensive talks with high-level government and opposition representatives in Chisinau, Tbilisi and Tunis.
No such agreements have been concluded to date with Belarus.
Click here for the photo gallery of the joint trip of the two Foreign Ministers
Under the new-look ENP, additional resources in the order of one billion euros were offered to reform-minded countries in 2011.
These additional funds are channelled mainly through two programmes: SPRING (Support for Partnership, Reform and Inclusive Growth) for countries in the Southern Mediterranean and EaPIC (Eastern Partnership Co-operation and Integration Programme) for Eastern Partnership countries.
Germany is a major contributor to the NIF.
In 2007-2013, a total of 12 billion euros were available for the ENPI, which includes both the Eastern Partnership and the Southern Dimension of the Neighbourhood Policy.
In 2014, the ENPI is being replaced by the new European Neighbourhood Instrument (ENI). This new instrument is to be more strongly driven by political objectives and allow a more differentiated approach that takes into account both the progress countries are making on their reform agendas as well as regional needs.
It will also support regional and cross-border cooperation at the EU’s external borders.
The German Government has long been actively engaged in fostering good relations between the EU and its eastern neighbours.
This was also an important foreign policy objective of Germany’s EU Presidency in 2007. In response to a Polish-Swedish initiative, the Council resolved in May 2008 to establish an Eastern Partnership as a regional component of the ENP.
This Eastern Partnership was finally launched in Prague in May 2009 under the Czech EU Presidency.
The second and third EP summits took place in Warsaw in September 2011 and in Vilnius in November 2013.
The visa requirement for Moldovan citizens entering the EU will be lifted in the coming week.
The Republic of Moldova and Georgia initialled an Association and Free Trade Agreement with the EU at the Vilnius summit.
Ukraine signed the political section of the Association Agreement in March 2014.
More on the Eastern Partnership
Cooperation with the Mediterranean region
builds on the Barcelona Process initiated in 1995 and aims to focus on concrete project work.
More on the Union for the Mediterranean
Black Sea Synergy
On the initiative of the Commission and the German EU Presidency in the first half of 2007, Black Sea Synergy was launched with the aim of intensifying cooperation with this strategically important Black Sea region.
In February 2008 a Black Sea Synergy ministerial conference adopted guidelines for cooperation between the EU and the Black Sea region in the areas of transport, energy and the environment.
The European Commission report of July 2008 on the progress made in implementing Black Sea Synergy took stock of the projects and initiatives started in the first year of its existence.
The Black Sea Environmental Partnership established in March 2010 aims, among other things, to protect biodiversity and combat pollution in the Black Sea region.
Future priorities will be the fight against pollution as well as the promotion and monitoring of environmental concerns and of ecological innovation.
Various ENP documents in English are available at: http://ec.europa.eu/world/enp/documents_en.htm
Implementation and financing of the ENP
Germany and the European Union have a particular interest in developments in their immediate neighbourhood.
Under the auspices of the European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) the EU therefore promotes political, economic and societal ties with its neighbouring states, as well as relations among these states.
Following Armenia’s announcement that it would join the Eurasian Customs Union, the association and free trade agreement which had been negotiated could no longer be signed, as membership of the Customs Union is not compatible with an EU free trade agreement.
The aim is to help partner countries foster stability, modernisation and democratic reform in particular as well as to promote dialogue with civil society.
Against the background of events in Ukraine and the ongoing transformation processes in other partner states, the German, French and Polish Foreign Ministers – Frank-Walter Steinmeier, Laurent Fabius and Radosław Sikorski – adopted a Weimar declaration on the European Neighbourhood Policy in April 2014.
It says in the declaration that flexible financial support, a better set of instruments for crises and improved compatibility with the integration offers from other states are important.
An attractive, long-term offer of economic integration should be made to those partners who are the most advanced in association with the EU.
The European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument (ENPI) was created in 2007 to help realise the ENP.
ENPI funding and bilateral contributions from member states are also channelled to the Neighbourhood Investment Facility (NIF) created in 2008, which is intended to maximise the impact of the ENPI and thereby provide the greatest possible boost for reform in the EU’s neighbouring countries and regions.
This funding was roughly allocated in a 2:1 ratio (south:east).
15.4 billion euros are to be earmarked for the ENI between 2014 and 2020.
On France’s initiative, the Union for the Mediterranean (UfM) was launched in Paris during the French EU Presidency in July 2008. The UfM, to which all EU member states, Mediterranean littoral states (except Libya), Jordan and Mauritania belong (43 countries in total),
Extension of EULEX Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo reflects Kosovo’s maturity and sense of responsibility
Parliament’s broad backing for these votes reflects the maturity and sense of responsibility of a large majority of policy-makers in Kosovo.
It is geared towards the EU’s immediate neighbours both to the east (Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine) and the south (Algeria, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, the Palestinian territories, Syria and Tunisia).
Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Fabius are holding joint talks in the Europe Union’s eastern and southern neighbourhoods from 23 to 25 April.
Foreign Ministers Frank-Walter Steinmeier and Laurent Fabius are holding joint talks in the EU’s eastern and southern neighbourhoods from 23 to 25 April.
To end their trip, on Friday (25 April) both Ministers are taking part in a Franco-German panel discussion in Paris in remembrance of the First World War.
Steinmeier and the President of Georgia, Margvelashvili
In Tbilisi on Thursday (24 April), Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Fabius first met with President Giorgi Margvelashvili.
In their subsequent meeting with their counterpart Maia Panjikdze, relations between Europe and Georgia were at the top of the agenda.
Steinmeier and Fabius expressed their recognition for the reform progress that the country has made.
At their joint press conference, the German Foreign Minister said that Georgia had achieved a great deal, including in the field of reforming the rule of law and fighting corruption.
The pending signature of the Association Agreement between the European Union and Georgia was therefore an “important milestone in European-Georgian relations”.
Talking with Foreign Minister Panjikdze
Steinmeier and Fabius expressed their continued support for the country’s reform path as well as the good quality of relations with Georgia.
Steinmeier and Fabius had further talks in Tbilisi with the Speaker of the Parliament, Davit Usupashvili, and the Opposition Leader, David Bakradze.
Travelling on to Tbilisi together
On Wednesday (23 April), the two Foreign Ministers had already visited the Republic of Moldova.
Here, Steinmeier and Fabius wanted to show support and solidarity:
an Association Agreement between the European Union (EU) and the Republic of Moldova is due to be signed in June.
Talking to the Moldovan Prime Minister
In Chisinau the two Foreign Ministers first had a discussion with Prime Minister Iurie Leanca.
I am sure it will be possible to clear the last remaining obstacles out of the way and to sign the Agreement by summer.
Concern about the situation in Ukraine
Joint press conference in Chisinau  © these pictures may be used free of charge provided copyright is acknowledged: photothek/Gottschalk
With regard to the crisis in Ukraine, both Foreign Ministers expressed their understanding for the concern, especially from the neighbouring countries’ perspective, about the ominous situation.
In Georgia and Moldova they re-emphasised that the EU’s Eastern Partnership was not directed against anyone – Russia included.
The energy of all those involved should be directed at de-escalating the whole situation, they stressed.
Steinmeier warned that time for this was running out.
He stated that strengthening the OSCE mission in Ukraine was also important.
To this end, Germany would increase its financial contribution and make more personnel available.
Commenting on the crisis in Ukraine, Steinmeier continued:
Therefore the Ministers from Germany and France reiterated that “diplomacy and dialogue” were the only solutions – this was their “joint message to Kyiv and Moscow”.
Subsequent legs of the trip
On Thursday, Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Fabius travelled on to Tunisia together, where they will hold political discussions and will also meet with President Moncef Marzouki.
On Friday (25 April) their joint trip will come to an end in Paris.
The EULEX mandate has thus been extended until June 2016 and the go-ahead given for the establishment of a special court to hear cases arising from the work of the Special Investigative Task Force, which has been looking into the allegations contained in the Marty report.
These relate to war crimes and crimes against humanity allegedly committed in the immediate aftermath of the Kosovo war, and include trafficking in human organs.
EULEX plays a key role in strengthening rule-of-law structures in Kosovo and supporting the process of dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina.
MPs also approved the establishment of an international special court to hear cases dealing with allegations contained in what is known as the Marty report, published by the Council of Europe.
at the opening of the Turkish-German University
We are founding a university in the spirit of partnership and dialogue.
Of course this step has been carefully prepared –
And so it is fitting that the Ernst Reuter Initiative for Intercultural Dialogue and Understanding provided a crucial impetus for the foundation of this Turkish-German University.
Relations between Turkey and Germany have become steadily closer and more intensive.
Vice versa, Turkish universities attract many students from Germany.
students spend one year studying in Ankara and one year in Berlin.
The Turkish-German University marks the next step on the path to internationalisation –
This is how the Turkish-German University can manage to send a signal that cooperation makes all partners stronger.
It lies at the interface between Europe and Asia.
It is in the interest of both our countries to make studying at the Turkish-German University attractive to more young people from Turkey, from Germany as well as from other countries.
I hope that this university will give many young Turks the chance to learn German and perhaps even to come to Germany for a longer stay.
I am firmly convinced that multilingualism – with Turkish, German and English – can be one of this universities great strengths.
I thank all of those who have worked to enable us to officially open this fantastic institution today – the Turkish partners as well as the members of the German consortium.
This path may not always be straight.
For this I wish you courage, composure and a great deal of joy in teaching and learning.
We welcome the fact that Kosovo’s parliament yesterday approved the extension of EULEX Kosovo, the European Union Rule of Law Mission in the country, by a large majority.
Kosovo has thus clearly expressed its commitment to the adjudication of such crimes, even in highly political cases.
The votes are also a clear demonstration of the country’s desire to continue its close cooperation with the EU on the rule of law and security, and to move closer to the EU.
On 23 April 2014, Kosovo’s parliament approved the exchange of letters between President Jahjaga and EU High Representative Ashton concerning the agreement to continue the EU Rule of Law Mission EULEX Kosovo with the required two-thirds majority.
German diplomat Bernd Borchardt currently heads EULEX Kosovo.
In the Federal Republic we will not forget that many Germans who fled repression and persecution at the hand of the National Socialist regime found refuge in Turkey.
Many of those who returned to Germany after the war retained links with Turkey, regardless of whether they went on to work in business or academia, in culture or in politics.
In the history of the very diverse links between Turkey and Germany, academia has often played a special role.
“The most beautiful sea hasn’t been crossed yet.”
With this ceremony we are now also providing an official opening for the Turkish-German University.
negotiations have taken place, agreements have been reached and as early as last autumn the first students began their studies here.
As professor of municipal policy at the Faculty of Political Science at Ankara University, from 1938 he helped to further the development of Turkish cities.
This is also why today, Germany is second only to the United States as a destination for Turkish students.
Today, they can undertake internationally-oriented studies in their own country, in other countries in Europe and in other parts of the world.
This means that the Turkish-German University is already an example of a successful partnership between our countries.
Through exchange with German partner universities as well as excellent performance in research and teaching, it has the chance to become a “lighthouse” for academia.
Bild: LGBTI demonstration
The German Government opposes any form of discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation and has been making every effort to combat discrimination against lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons.
Human rights include the right to free sexual orientation.
Of course each and every beginning has a long history behind it.
Guidelines to Promote and Protect the Enjoyment of all Human Rights by Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender and Intersex (LGBTI) Persons
These guidelines are intended to enable the EU to react to the violation of LGBTI persons’ human rights in third countries and to have an impact on its structural causes.
The emphasis is on measures to decriminalise LGBTI persons, to eliminate discrimination against them, as well as to protect and support human rights activists campaigning for LGBTI rights.
COHOM regularly monitors developments related to human rights and monitors the implementation of the guidelines.
An open and objective discussion on discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity is still very much a taboo within the United Nations.
Nevertheless, progress has been made.
For example, the Yogyakarta Principles were presented by internationally renowned human rights experts in Yogyakarta/Indonesia on 23 March 2007.
These 29 principles represent a global standard for guaranteeing the human rights of LGBTI persons.
The central issues are combating violence against homosexuals and the criminal prosecution of homosexuality as well as access to education, the right to establish a family, freedom of assembly and the right to asylum.
Germany is calling for the Yogyakarta Principles to be included in the EU’s LGBTI Toolkit.
Germany, along with its EU partners, was one of the first to sign.
The declaration brings together parts of existing international agreements on human rights and formulates the aim of protection from any form of discrimination, prosecution and use of force by states on grounds of sexual orientation or gender identity.
This statement has already been signed by 85 states.
This was sponsored by South Africa, which is of special importance considering that homosexuality is still a criminal offence in many African countries.
The vote was close, with 23 countries voting in favour and 19 against. This shows that despite achieving this milestone, we still have a long way to go.
Council of Europe
The recommendation relates to the application of existing provisions from international agreements, such as the non-discrimination provisions contained in the UN Human Rights Convention.
It also contains a list of measures aimed at improving legislation in the member states.
Projects and bilateral cooperation
Particularly in those countries where the situation of LGBTI persons is especially precarious, the Federal Foreign Office seeks to help the victims of discrimination.
Within the scope of bilateral cooperation, the Federal Foreign Office has already promoted numerous projects aimed at improving the human rights situation of LGBTI persons.
Examples of this are:
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and his French counterpart visit Moldova and Georgia
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier and his French opposite number, Laurent Fabius, have travelled to the EU’s eastern and southern neighbourhood for joint talks.
After visiting the Republic of Moldova on 23 April, they held political talks in the Georgian capital of Tbilisi on 24 April.
In Serbia, a film project which spotlighted attacks on demonstrations for the rights of LGBTI persons (gay prides) was funded.
The film “Parada” by the Serbian director Srdjan Dragojevic was shot in Serbia, Montenegro and Croatia and starts with the bloody outcome of the first gay parade in Belgrade in 2001.
In a mixture of fiction and reality, it is about a friendship between two people from two different groups which leads to deep-seated prejudices being overcome.
Intersex persons
In recent times, intersex persons have been included in the abovementioned LGBTI group of persons. For example, they are mentioned in the EU’s LGBTI Toolkit.
Intersexuality covers various phenomena of non clear-cut gender with different – for instance chromosomal or cellular – causes.
The German Government subsequently tasked the National Ethics Council in Germany with presenting a statement on the situation of intersex persons.
Within a generation the opportunities available to young people to study abroad have improved drastically.
They can also network with other young people across country borders.
For you, students and teachers alike, I hope that you will be able to use imagination and determination to help shape upcoming developments.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier on the situation in Ukraine
The latest developments indicate that the conflict over Ukraine continues to escalate.
The reports coming in of violence and deaths make clear that things cannot go on like this!
This is not the way to resolve the conflict.
Quite the reverse, in fact. Day after day of violence and confrontation further dims any prospect of defusing the conflict by diplomatic means.
Those responsible for the escalation must realise that if the wrong decisions are now taken, decades of work for peace and security in Europe could be wasted.
It would be folly to put all that at risk!
Before it comes to further bloodshed and deaths, Kyiv and Moscow have a responsibility to live up to the commitments they undertook in Geneva. These are:
To refrain from violence 2.
To return occupied buildings to their legitimate owners 4.
For a change of course it is still not too late!
I am delighted that my friend Laurent Fabius is able to attend this inauguration ceremony today.
with the aim of underscoring our common engagement for the European Union’s southern and eastern neighbours.
It is a role model for the entire region – and further afield.
Foreign Minister,
At this point I would like to thank several people without whom the rapid implementation of this building project would not have been possible.
Arriving in Tunis on 7 April 1914, Paul Klee wrote in his journal:
“We know we will be able to work well here.”
in Istanbul on 29 April 2014
yet it is also exciting and exhilarating in a very positive sense.
Together, Turkey and the Federal Republic of Germany are opening a new chapter in our two countries’ relations in the field of academia.
Our two countries have cooperated in this field since the time of the Ottoman Empire.
And some of them even found new jobs at Turkish universities – one example is the man who would later become the Governing Mayor of Berlin, Ernst Reuter.
and the internationalisation of academia and research is crucial for this.
It follows a roadmap, but today we do not fully know when and how the next steps forward will come about.
Just how important this day is to my country is highlighted by the presence of the Federal Minister of Education and Research, Prof. Johanna Wanka.
I am delighted at the closeness of relations between our countries in the fields of education and science – something which also finds expression in the German-Turkish year of academia.
It is only together that we can successfully ask ourselves the key questions of the future
I have heard that the Middle East Technical University where I spoke yesterday offers a social sciences degree course in conjunction with the Humboldt-Universität – a course with an intercultural dimension:
as is the case with other universities with a connection to Germany, it is an instrument of bilateral cooperation.
Through close cooperation with Turkish and German companies it can also help to boost and further strengthen economic relations between our countries.
This university is something quite special as it serves as a forum for dialogue as well as exchange of knowledge and ideas between Turkey and Germany.
It is a place of intercultural contact, a place that is designed to bring young people from Turkey and Germany together.
Many of the connections that will be made here will last a lifetime and will push people forward.
My hope for the Turkish-German University is that it may become a place of excellence and a place of meetings.
You, the students of this first year group, the lecturers and all members of staff of the Turkish-German University are standing at the beginning of a path.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier on the situation in Slavyansk
Whoever feels the spirit of internationalism and enterprise on this wonderful campus in Beykoz may well think of the words of the Turkish poet Nâzım Hikmet –
Daring to try something new always entails great effort,
On the margins of his visit to Tunis, Foreign Minister Steinmeier today (25 April) issued the following statement on the current situation in Ukraine:
I call on Russia and Ukraine to exercise maximum restraint, return to the parameters of the Geneva accord and give its implementation a chance.
To disarm illegal groups 3.
To grant amnesty  The OSCE stands ready to assist in this process.
It must now be given the opportunity to implement the Geneva accord. It is entitled here to the active support of all parties.
Welcome to the new chancery of the Federal Republic of Germany in Tunisia!
The new building is attractive, and it was also urgently needed!
As soon as news of the events came out Foreign Minister Steinmeier ordered a crisis unit to be set up in the Federal Foreign Office.
Germany is in close contact with the Governments of Russia, Ukraine as well as the OSCE and is using all means available to secure the release of those affected as soon as possible.
An OSCE negotiation team is in the region.
“We are doing everything in our power to secure the release of the detained persons and to ensure that they can return to their tasks in good health and as soon as possible.
Naturally we fully support the OSCE in these efforts.
Today I spoke to the President of the Swiss Confederation, who is also the Chair of the OSCE.
I also spoke to the Ukrainian Prime Minister as well as once again to the Russian Foreign Minister.
I asked all three for the highest degree of support and am very pleased that all three pledged their support and expressed their will to do all they can to work for the release of the inspectors.”
Measures for increased transparency and confidence-building as well as for peaceful conflict management form a central component of the Vienna Document.
For more information on the Vienna Document click here.
For more information on the OSCE click here
Here in Tunisia many developments were sparked which since 2011 have transformed the Arab-Muslim world.
Not everywhere have the changes generated more freedom and democracy.
Human right to water and sanitation
Access to clean drinking water is a human right
The lack of access to drinking water and sanitation is one of the main challenges of our time.
This Embassy represents the interests of the Federal Republic of Germany in Tunisia.
Yet in these days particularly it also has a special responsibility to do everything in its power to support you, your government and the Tunisian people as you continue along the path of reform.
768 million people have no access to improved drinking water and 2.5 billion people have no adequate sanitation.
The resulting diseases kill more children than malaria, measles and AIDS put together.
millions of children and adolescents thus lose out on education and the chance to escape poverty.
Ensuring economic stability and overcoming security challenges is vital if Tunisia is to succeed politically.
because of concerns that it will require substantial financial commitment.
It is true that the human right to clean drinking water and sanitation obliges states to create appropriate framework conditions and rules and to invest or create investment incentives, in order to bring about a gradual improvement in the supply situation.
The economic benefit of clean water
Similarly, sanitation facilities must be safe, hygienic, socially and culturally acceptable and affordable, and protect privacy and dignity.
Clearly this cannot be done for nothing, but the financial outlay brings a huge economic benefit:
German-Spanish initiative
Catarina de Albuquerque on a mission to Brazil
At the end of their joint trip Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Fabius took part in a discussion with German and French historians in Paris entitled “Of the Failure of and Need for Diplomacy”.
Against this background, Germany, along with Spain, has long been committed to the human right to clean drinking water and sanitation.
Panel discussion with Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Fabius
This right derives from the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
One hundred years ago the famous German artists Paul Klee and August Macke toured Tunisia together.
I wish you much joy in this new building.
The first resolution on the right to water and sanitation was adopted by the UN Human Rights Council in 2008, as a result of a joint initiative by Germany and Spain. At the same time the resolution established the mandate for an Independent Expert on this human right.
The holder of this post is Catarina de Albuquerque from Portugal.
Her task is to contribute to the clarification of the legal obligations related to this issue and to identify best practices.
OHCHR:
Special Rapporteur on the human right to safe drinking water and sanitation
Germany supports the work of the Independent Expert in substance, financially and by supporting relevant resolutions.
Human right to clean drinking water recognised by all UN member states
Drinking water supply in Pakistan
In addition to measures under international law, however, this subject needs even greater public attention.
There are three aspects here:
first of all, the political will of the decision-makers needs to be aroused and strengthened, because water and sanitation are basic prerequisites for a dignified life.
Moreover, supplying these needs is of economic benefit.
Growth and prosperity can emerge when basic human needs are met.
Taboo surrounding the discussion of sanitation must be removed
Existing misunderstandings need to be cleared up.
For instance, guaranteeing the human right to water and sanitation is an individual right and creates no claims between states.
Whilst the right to water and sanitation is primarily a matter for governments, there is no reason why the supply should not be privatised and appropriate charges levied.
Last but not least, the taboo surrounding the discussion of sanitation must be removed.
Education about necessary hygiene measures is one of the most efficient ways to prevent disease.
WASH United
In addition to its multilateral engagement, the Federal Foreign Office and its missions abroad use meetings at bilateral level to heighten local decision-makers’ awareness of the issue.
The Federal Foreign Office also actively supports the WASH United information campaign which, with the help of well-known sportspeople, entertainers and politicians, draws attention to the right to clean drinking water and sanitation and aims to change attitudes.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier in Tunis
“The OSCE has our full support in the negotiations currently underway.
Today’s parading of OSCE observers and Ukrainian security forces as prisoners is abhorrent and a flagrant violation of their human dignity.
This also violates every rule of proper behaviour and all the standards that were established for just such tense situations as these.
Russia has an obligation to use its influence with the separatists in order to convince them to release the members of the OSCE mission being held as quickly as possible.”
The Federal Foreign Office crisis unit chaired by Secretary of State Markus Ederer met this afternoon at the behest of Foreign Minister Steinmeier.
Steinmeier went on to say that this was not the way to resolve the conflict.
“Quite the reverse, in fact.
Day after day of violence and confrontation further dims any prospect of defusing the conflict by diplomatic means.
Each year diarrhoeal diseases result in the loss of over 400 million school days;
All sides must now see reason!”
Meeting the right to water means that every individual must have access to healthy, acceptable, physically accessible and affordable water, in sufficient quantities for personal needs and for use in the home.
The Federal Government is leaving no stone unturned to secure the release of the detained OSCE inspectors
Since 25 April, inspectors from the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), four of whom are German nationals, have been held against their will by separatist forces in Slavyansk in eastern Ukraine.
one dollar invested in water/sanitation brings eight dollars of benefit to the economy.
Geneva accord must be given a chance
Foreign Minister Steinmeier therefore called on Russia and Ukraine to exercise maximum restraint, return to the parameters of the Geneva accord and give its implementation a chance.
“Before it comes to further bloodshed and deaths, Kyiv and Moscow have a responsibility to live up to the commitments they undertook in Geneva,” Steinmeier stressed.
These are:
The farthest-reaching measure is the resolution on human rights, sexual orientation and sexual identity adopted by the 17th session of the Human Rights Council on 17 June 2011.
Human Rights Council resolution on human rights, sexual orientation and sexual identity (14 July 2011)
To grant amnesty
Speaking in Tunis, Steinmeier said that the OSCE stood ready to assist in this process.
He urged all sides to make use of this offer.
Bild: Launch of the film “Parada”
The aim was to raise awareness among the general public of homophobia and to foster tolerance towards homosexuals.
Whilst the human right to clean drinking water and adequate sanitation is universally recognised, this right is not universally implemented,
Further information can be found on the website: www.wash-united.org.
In November 2012 and 2013, projects to provide further training in the sphere of “LGBTI and religion” for LGBTI human rights activists from Africa and the Middle East were carried out:
LGBTI activists travelled to Germany to meet representatives of churches, the state and other activists and organisations and to discuss their experiences and projects.
Within this framework, the Federal Foreign Office and its project partner – the Hirschfeld-Eddy Foundation – organised a public conference on “Homosexuality and churches in Africa”.
“The OSCE must now be given the opportunity to implement the Geneva accord. It is entitled here to the active support of all parties.”
Steinmeier concluded by re¬emphasising the urgency of the situation in Ukraine.
“Little time remains to put a stop to the madness.”
CEDAW Committee
The discussion was moderated by journalist Michaela Wiegel.
The German Government regards the Yogyakarta Principles as an important contribution by civil society which can rationalise the debate on discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation and gender identity.
Furthermore, there were high-level interventions in protest against the Russian ban on “propaganda of non-traditional sexual relations to minors”, which criminalises any positive reporting on homosexuality in the presence of minors or in the media such as the Internet.
In a contribution for the CEDAW Report (Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women) of February 2009 written by intersex persons, the situation of these people is described.
The CEDAW Committee called on Germany to enter into a dialogue with NGOs for intersex and transsexual persons in order to gain a better understanding of their needs and to take effective measures to protect their human dignity.
To refrain from violence
To disarm illegal groups
To return occupied buildings to their legitimate owners
“The reports coming in of violence and deaths make clear
that things cannot go on like this!”
“The latest developments indicate that the conflict over Ukraine continues to escalate,” said Foreign Minister Steinmeier on Friday (25 April), speaking on the margins of his visit to Tunis.
Today (25 April), on the margins of his visit to Tunisia, Foreign Minister Steinmeier called upon all sides to exercise restraint in the Ukraine conflict.
That is encouraging for the next stage of the election process.
On 26 April, the Independent Electoral Commission in Afghanistan announced the provisional outcome of the presidential elections.
The official result is expected to be made known on 14 May.
Germany has provided 11 million US dollars for the election process through the United Nations.
Afghanistan: “Important step forward in the presidential elections”
The elections have largely gone off to plan so far: the fact that it was possible to count the votes with hardly any delay is a good sign.
The next task is to examine the complaints submitted in the course of the election process in a transparent and credible manner and to organise the next round of the elections in the same fashion.
I have great respect for the courage shown by people in Afghanistan and for their resolve to help determine their country’s future despite the tense security situation.
The architect, Mr Slim Kebir, has created a bright and friendly space which conveys openness and transparency – two maxims that we hope will continue to characterise our relations with Tunisia.
A new chancery was highly necessary!
Since the revolution Germany has doubled its Embassy staff, and its cooperation with Tunisia has increased fourfold.
This new Embassy building in Tunis therefore also symbolises Germany’s strong commitment to a modern, democratic Tunisia under the rule of law and to the country's citizens.
We have just visited Moldova and Georgia together, and have now commenced our talks here in Tunis,
Since the revolution Tunisia has been going through very testing times.
All of you – politicians, parties and civil society players working together –have put the common good above all other interests and have thus facilitated the adoption of the new constitution.
Yet the Tunisian model is an impressive example of tenacity in staying the course as well as level-headedness in pursuing a common goal.
Together, Germany and France are therefore working for Europe to make this a special priority over the coming years.
My thanks go to the developer, Mr Fathi Neiffar, for all the commitment he has shown.
I would also like to thank former Ambassadors Wolfram Kerll and Jens Plötner – the two predecessors of Mr Reinicke, the new head.
Thanks to the efforts of all the colleagues involved, it has taken only two years to complete the project.
We want to commemorate their travels with a series of events throughout the year.
My hope for all the German Embassy staff is that you will be able to record the same sentiments in your own journals!
Speech by Federal Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier at the opening of the new German Embassy chancery in Tunis on 24 April 2014
My dear Laurent, Ambassador,
However, homosexuality is a criminal offence in around 80 countries; in some countries, same-sex acts can even incur the death penalty.
In June 2013, the EU adopted the Guidelines to Promote and Protect the Enjoyment of all Human Rights by Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender and Intersex (LGBTI) Persons.
The guidelines were negotiated by the Working Party on Human Rights at the EU (COHOM), which is responsible for shaping the EU’s human rights policy vis-à-vis third countries.
In December 2008, a statement on sexual orientation and gender identity with regard to specific LGBTI rights was read out in the UN General Assembly, and has since been signed by 68 states.
In March 2011, a joint statement on ending acts of violence and the related human rights violations on grounds of sexual orientation and gender identity was adopted at the 16th session of the Human Rights Council.
In spring 2010, the Council of Europe adopted a recommendation to the member states on discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity.
Resolution 1728 of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe
“Parada” was supported by the Federal Foreign Office and received the renowned Panorama Audience Award at the 62nd Berlinale in 2012.
In October 2012, funding was provided for a human rights conference in St. Petersburg organised by the Hirschfeld-Eddy Foundation on LGBTIs.
More information on this event is available here.
There are between 80,000 and 120,000 people in the Germany who are medically defined as intersex persons.
Parading of the OSCE inspectors violates all standards
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier called this act abhorrent and a violation of all standards.
The unit has met repeatedly, and did so again on Sunday afternoon under the leadership of State Secretary Markus Ederer.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier stressed that Russia still had an obligation to use its influence with the separatists in order to convince them to release the members of the OSCE mission being held as quickly as possible.
The Federal Government is leaving no stone unturned to secure the release of the detained OSCE inspectors
Following the discussions, the German Foreign Minister stated:
“I am very pleased that all three pledged their support and expressed their will to do all they can to work for the release of the inspectors.”
Inspectors from the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) have been held as prisoners of separatist forces in Slavyansk, in eastern Ukraine, since 25 April.
On Sunday (27 April), the separatists paraded the detained OSCE inspectors in front of the press.
On Sunday Foreign Minister Steinmeier re-emphasised that the OSCE had the full support of the Federal Government for the negotiations which are currently taking place:
Foreign Minister Steinmeier had already commented on the efforts of the Federal Government beforehand (26 April), stating that the Federal Government was leaving no stone unturned “to secure the release of the detained persons and to ensure that they can return to their tasks in good health and as soon as possible”.
“In very close contact with the OSCE, we are continuing to make every effort to bring about a positive solution.”
The OSCE is working on the ground to achieve a swift release through contacts and talks, including with the groups who are holding the OSCE inspectors.
When he spoke to the President of the Swiss Confederation and current Chair of the OSCE, Didier Burkhalter, the Prime Minister of Ukraine, Arseniy Yatsenyuk, as well as the Russian Foreign Minister, Sergey Lavrov, Steinmeier asked all three for the highest degree of support.
History:
At the weekend (26 April), Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement on the Federal Government’s efforts:
The OSCE team in question is in the country at the invitation of Ukraine under the Vienna Document, a politically-binding agreement between all 57 OSCE member states.
Commemorative year 2014: The Franco-German perspective
On Friday Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier and his French counterpart Laurent Fabius wound up their joint trip through Europe’s eastern and southern neighbourhood in Paris.
The focus of the discussion, one of a series of special events planned for 2014, was the question whether Europe is now proof against the mistakes made in 1914 as well as what, if any, lessons are to be learned from history.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier calls for death sentences to be reversed
The discussion took place at Palais Beauharnais, the residence of German Ambassador Susanne Wasum-Rainer.
At the Palais Beauharnais they took part in a panel discussion with a German and a French historian.
In his opening statement Foreign Minister Fabius spoke of the powerful symbolism the evening evoked.
A united Europe an incredible achievement
Foreign Minister Steinmeier in the Palais Beauharnais, Paris
Today, too, Europe needs wise foreign policy and wise diplomacy
The steadily escalating crisis in Ukraine and the question of how to deal with Russia called for “vigorous, wise diplomacy that opts not to cease communication but actively seeks to prevent a new division of Europe”.
To the audience, who included the ambassador of the Russian Federation, Steinmeier addressed an urgent appeal:
“For Laurent and myself as well as our European colleagues one thing is vital. We stand for cooperation in and with our neighbourhood – in Ukraine as well as with our other eastern and southern neighbours – and that specifically includes Russia.”
Federal Foreign Minister visits Norway
Foreign Minister Steinmeier holds talks with the Norwegian Government and NATO Secretary General designate Jens Stoltenberg in Oslo.
(from left) Weinrich, Fabius, Wiegel, Steinmeier, Becker
Until these three countries apply what is known as the Schengen acquis in full, as is their aim, passport controls will remain in place at internal borders.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier and Norway’s Prime Minister Erna Solberg
More food for thought for the subsequent discussion was provided by historians Becker from France and Weinrich from Germany.
On Monday (28 April) Foreign Minister Steinmeier paid his first official visit to Norway since resuming office.
The cities, too, were blighted by “the Great War”, as the French called it.
There was virtually not a single village without its war memorial or monument to the fallen.
His first meeting in Oslo was with the Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Norway, Erna Solberg.
In the same vein German historian Weinrich pointed out how different the two nations’ remembrance cultures were.
The talks with Solberg focused on the very good German-Norwegian relations as well as current foreign policy crises, most notably the conflict in Ukraine.
“The Cataclysm”
in Franco-German historiography
And they both subscribed to the universal lessons it held for peace in Europe – the importance of international understanding, Franco-German partnership and European integration.
Lessons of history with regard to the Ukraine crisis
Jointly tackling foreign policy challenges
Steinmeier and his Norwegian counterpart Brende
Thirteen members of an OSCE military observer mission are still being held by separatists in Ukraine.
The following lively discussion with the audience focused particularly on what lessons history can offer in the tense climate created by the current crisis in Ukraine.
Speech by Foreign Minister Steinmeier
Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement today (27 April) on the first stage of the presidential elections in Afghanistan:
"Despite considerable international scepticism, Afghanistan took an important step forward in the presidential elections with the announcement of the provisional results.
The country will only remain united in the difficult transition period following the withdrawal of the international troops if the new president emerges from free elections and is widely accepted by the people."
In addition, for many years the German Government has been supporting the independent Afghan organisation Free and Fair Election Forum Afghanistan (FEFA), which commissioned almost 10,000 observers to monitor the recent elections.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued a statement today (28 April) on the death sentences handed down to 683 members of the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt:
The hundreds of death sentences handed down today go against everything that we understand by the principles of the rule of law.
The Egyptian authorities are running the risk of further destabilising the country and cementing the division within politics and society in the run-up to the presidential elections due to take place in May.
We will communicate the Federal Government’s clear expectation to the Egyptian Ambassador in a talk at the Federal Foreign Office that the sentences be reversed and the accused receive a fair trial.
Interview given by Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier on the current situation in Ukraine.
Published in the Spiegel magazine, issue 18/2014
Minister Steinmeier, do you understand why people might currently be afraid of a war breaking out with Russia?
We all sense that the events of the last few months could lead to a break, to a crossroad for Europe.
nobody could have foreseen how quickly we have slid into the worst crisis since the end of the Cold War.
The gains we have made almost everywhere in Europe in terms of peace, freedom and prosperity are now at stake.
That is why it is important we take every measure to prevent things from getting worse.
Abolition of the death penalty
For a long time, a military escalation between Western and Eastern Europe was considered out of the question.
Is that certainty still valid?
if the wrong decisions are made now, they could nullify decades of work furthering the freedom and security of Europe.
Nobody of sound mind can seriously want that.
Is the Russian leadership playing with fire?
The financial markets are already reaching their verdict:
This nationalist exuberance could swiftly lead to a hangover.
Why is the situation in eastern Ukraine so opaque and chaotic?
In 1991, Ukraine inherited a difficult legacy with its independence.
It lies on the border between East and West, with regions that have completely different histories, with a plethora of unresolved ethnic, religious, social and economic conflicts.
The two foreign ministers also held in-depth talks on bilateral and European issues, the future of the Middle East peace process and the recent death sentences in Egypt.
Now in this crisis there are stakeholders on the ground who are not revealing their true motives or deeds to us, and others who are playing with loaded dice.
It is anyone’s guess whether the Kremlin has a master plan or if the Russian leadership is making decisions as it goes along.
Click here to read a joint statement by Steinmeier and his Norwegian counterpart Brende:
LINK to Egypt statement of 28 April
That this course of action has – at least in the short term – wide popular approval, complicates matters.
Would the Federal Government and NATO be well-advised to revisit their strategic defence planning and armaments priorities?
There is no military solution to the conflict in the Ukraine.
Even if it can sometimes be frustrating,
Meeting with the NATO Secretary General designate
Do you think it is Europe or the United States that is more likely to come out of this conflict geopolitically strengthened?
NATO Secretary General designate Jens Stoltenberg
He will take over from the Dane Anders Fogh Rasmussen.
On Monday Steinmeier had already congratulated Norway on the appointment at the press conference in Oslo.
It is, in any case, playing a dangerous game with potentially dramatic consequences – for Russia in particular.
And this does not even take into consideration the foreign investments that Russia so urgently needs for its modernisation.
With regard to the Ukraine crisis the focus is on the principle of collective defence as well as the agenda of cooperative security.
Do have a notion of what Vladimir Putin is planning in the short and long term?
Close cooperation between EU and Norway
Restitution of antiquities to Egypt
The meeting will take place in the historic Akershus Fortress in the centre of Oslo.
Akershus Fortress in Oslo
Of course, that does not preclude us members of NATO from incorporating the latest developments into our joint planning – that is a matter of course.
Following the talks Foreign Minister Steinmeier will meet the Norwegian Minister responsible for EEA and EU affairs, Vidar Helgesen.
That was already the task of the Foreign Ministers at the most recent meeting of the North Atlantic Council, and now the results are indeed being implemented.
Norway is not a member of the EU but does belong to the European Economic Area (EEA):
Foreign Minister Steinmeier will return to Berlin late on Tuesday afternoon.
More on German-Norwegian relations
“The situation in Ukraine is worrying and at the moment is deteriorating from day to day,” said Foreign Minister Steinmeier, speaking in Oslo on Monday.
The Geneva accord could have formed the basis for starting to de-escalate the overall situation.
But we have not yet reached the point where all parties are willing to actually implement the steps outlined in this document.
The current foreign policy challenges were also at the centre of the evening’s talks.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and his Norwegian counterpart Børge Brende likewise discussed the crisis in Ukraine and relations with Russia.
Steinmeier stressed that “a rapid solution to this development” must be found.
I have spoken to the Russian interlocutors many times on the phone and explained in no uncertain terms that Russia, too, now has to use its influence to obtain the prisoners’ release as soon as possible.
Minister of State Böhmer to return art works illegally imported into Germany from Egypt
Commenting on the sentences passed on 683 supporters of the Muslim Brotherhood, Steinmeier said that they were “in no way politically or legally acceptable and violate international law”.
Speaking in Oslo, Steinmeier said he did not fear restrictions on Russian gas deliveries to Europe.
It does not surprise me that when the pressure in the pot rises, it would erupt.
Whoever thinks that war allows for lasting victories these days should have a look at European history books and learn their lesson.
Important role of Norway in diversification of energy supply
However, the German Foreign Minister emphasised that Norway played a crucial role in the diversification of energy supply, going on to say,
On Tuesday (29 April) Foreign Minister Steinmeier will meet former Norwegian Prime Minister Jens Stoltenberg, who has been appointed as the new NATO Secretary General from 1 October 2014.
The close ties between Norway and the European Union (EU) are reflected in the fields of free movement, fisheries policy and particularly economic cooperation, among others.
The EEA is an enhanced free-trade area between the countries of the EU and Norway, Iceland and Liechtenstein.
What countries are Schengen states?
Germany, Austria, Belgium, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland have all acceded to the Schengen Agreement and are thus Schengen states.
Ambassador Wasum-Rainer with the two foreign ministers
A separate visa may well be needed for travel to other EU states which are not Schengen states.
It was an evening entirely devoted to the content and expression of close Franco-German cooperation and friendship.
After their political talks in Moldova, Georgia and Tunisia from 23 to 25 April, the two foreign ministers flew in to Paris to take part in a panel discussion, one of a series of special events planned for 2014.
Besides the two foreign ministers, she welcomed their fellow panelists, Professor emeritus Jean-Jacques Becker and Dr Arndt Weinrich.
Both in their introductory remarks and the subsequent discussion with the very large audience, the panelists focused on what lessons history could offer, and the Franco-German perspective on these issues.
It offered a Franco-German perspective on the war and the lessons of history, he noted. The choice of venue alone –  the German ambassador’s residence in Paris –
impressively illustrated what a long way Germany and France had travelled together since the horrors of the World Wars.
Be that as it may, today Europe and diplomacy were facing their greatest test since the end of the Cold War, Steinmeier warned in his opening remarks.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier continued:
Drawing on his studies of the French experience, Becker emphasised what a huge and long-term impact the fighting during World War I had had on people in France and the nation as a whole.
Besides those who died in battle, there were all the war invalids, whose sufferings had scarred them for life.
He drew attention to a fundamental asymmetry in French and German perceptions of World War I, for in Germany’s collective consciousness the Shoah was clearly predominant.
Despite these differing perceptions of World War I, Weinrich explained that there were no real differences as far as the way the two nations wrote about history was concerned.
Both countries viewed World War I as the “European Cataclysm”.
The Schengen area thus includes all EU member states except the UK, Ireland and Cyprus; at present the EU members Bulgaria, Romania and Croatia only apply some of the Schengen provisions.
In addition to the EU countries already mentioned, Iceland, Norway, Switzerland and Liechtenstein are also Schengen states.
Holders of Schengen visas (text on the visa reads “valid for Schengen states” in the language of the issuing country) may spend up to 90 days in a given 180 days period in the Schengen area, provided their visa is valid at the time.
The same applies to holders of most national residence permits and national category D visas issued by individual Schengen states for long-term visits of more than three months.
Foreign Minister Fabius and Minister of State for European Affairs Désir in conversation
Not only the historians and foreign ministers but also members of the audience explored the question of what we in the 21st century could possibly learn from the situation in 1914.
Here Steinmeier summed up what motivates foreign policy and diplomacy as follows:
“A hundred years after the outbreak of World War I and seven decades after the end of World War II, our goal is to prevent any return to thinking in terms of spheres of influence.
German and French remembrance cultures
“I can understand why people are afraid”
I understand why that might scare people –
Those who can remember the fall of the Berlin Wall know what we have accomplished over the past 25 years.
I do not even want to think about military escalation between the West and the East. One thing, however, is clear:
Because we would pay the price for it in Europe – all of us, without exception.
Moscow stocks and bonds have fallen sharply. The outlook for growth has disappeared. Many Russians are openly cheering their leadership on while simultaneously withdrawing as-yet unknown amounts of capital out of Russia.
But it seems clear to me that when President Viktor Yanukovych fled in a panic from Kyiv on 21 February, it set off a dynamic in Moscow whose consequences we must now deal with.
I am firmly convinced that only persevering with diplomatic efforts can bring us any closer to a solution.
That is why I am arguing with all of my strength that the OSCE should get the chance to fulfil its mission as stipulated in the Geneva Statement.
I do not have a crystal ball, unfortunately.
But I caution against looking for winners and losers in the middle of the crisis based on concepts from the 19th and early 20th century.
Spheres of influence, geopolitical regions, hegemony, aspirations to dominance ... none of these are part of our foreign policy – though we would also be well-advised to take into account the fact that other people are thinking along those lines.
Franco-German perspective a source of powerful symbolism
From 28 to 29 April Foreign Minister Steinmeier will hold talks with the Norwegian Government and NATO Secretary General designate Jens Stoltenberg in Oslo.
“I would welcome a move by Norway to increase its production if the need arises.”
The two politicians want to exchange views on the future challenges facing the transatlantic military alliance and the strategic direction it should adopt.
At a ceremony at 11 a.m. on 30 April 2014 Minister of State at the Federal Foreign Office Prof Maria Böhmer will hand over three antiquities originating from Egypt to the country’s ambassador, Dr Mohamed Higazy.
All three had been illegally exported from Egypt. They were confiscated by customs officials, who discovered them hidden in a lorry at the German-Swiss border at Weil am Rhein.
On the eve of the handover ceremony Minister of State Böhmer expressed her delight that these art works, testimony to a great and ancient civilisation, were now returning to Egypt, where they would be accessible to the public.
She also drew attention to the harm caused by the illicit global trade in cultural property.
And if this were not enough –
With their visits to Moldova, Georgia and Tunisia they also want to further strengthen Franco-German cooperation.
At their first meeting in January 2014, Foreign Minister Steinmeier and his French counterpart Fabius had agreed on their mutual desire to further strengthen Franco-German cooperation.
They want to actively help shape European foreign policy by, amongst other things, visiting the European neighbourhood together.
And the time had arrived:
For their first stop they headed East, to the Republic of Moldova.
They appeared before the press together with Prime Minister Leanca and attested their support for Moldova as it forms closer ties with the European Union.
It was a clear demonstration of solidarity in times of uncertainty in the countries neighbouring Ukraine.
Nonetheless, through their talks, for example with Foreign Minister Panjikidze, Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Fabius also showed the close foreign policy connection between Germany and France.
Together the Foreign Ministers continued on to Tunisia, taking them to the EU’s southern partner countries.
The situation is quite different:
after the radical political change of 2011, Tunisia has taken important steps on the path to democracy.
Together, both countries will continue to stand closely by Tunisia.
The new German Embassy in Tunis is one expression of the forward-looking nature of the European-Tunisian partnership.
Steinmeier, Fabius and Tunisia’s Foreign Minister Hamdi inaugurated the building together.
As part of a series of events launched by Steinmeier, the two Ministers had a discussion with a German and a French historian on the lessons to be learnt from the failure of diplomacy, the outbreak of the First World War and the current crisis in Ukraine.
Foreign Minister Fabius invited his German counterpart to join him in giving a report of this first trip in the cabinet session of the French Government in mid-May.
From 23 to 25 April the Foreign Ministers of Germany and France, Steinmeier and Fabius, first travelled together to talks in Europe’s eastern and southern neighbourhoods.
from 23 to 25 April both Foreign Ministers travelled together to Europe’s partner countries.
On 23 April Steinmeier and Fabius began their trip in Chisinau by meeting the Government and Opposition.
The crisis in Ukraine and the concerns of the neighbouring countries were also a key topic of the talks on 24 April in Georgia.
In their talks on 24 and 25 April, the German and French Foreign Ministers expressed their great respect for the interim leadership.
The Foreign Ministers travelled to Paris together on 25 April to conclude their trip.
The fact that a German and a French Foreign Minister are holding political talks together and are travelling round the European neighbourhood together is a clear sign of the further development of the friendly, far-reaching relations between Germany and France.
In response to five executions in Taiwan, Christoph Strässer, the Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid at the Federal Foreign Office, issued the following statement today (29 April):
I condemn the execution of five people in Taiwan in the strongest possible terms.
Egyptian Ambassador summoned to the Federal Foreign Office
At the request of Foreign Minister Steinmeier, the Ambassador of the Arab Republic of Egypt, his Excellency Mohamed Higazy, was summoned to the Federal Foreign Office today (29 April).
Information:
statement by Foreign Minister Steinmeier on 28 April.
The Foreign Minister’s Personal Representative for the Arab World, Ambassador Volkmar Wenzel, delivered to Ambassador Higazy the Federal Government’s urgent appeal for the 683 death sentences handed down by an Egyptian court to members of the Muslim Brotherhood yesterday to be reversed by the relevant judicial authorities and for the persons in question to receive a trial which fulfils the basic requirements of the rule of law.
This is a serious setback for human rights in Taiwan.
Sombre anniversary for human rights in Belarus
Today is a sombre anniversary for human rights in Belarus.
Ales Bialiatski, winner of the Václav Havel Human Rights Prize, has been unjustly imprisoned for almost three years.
Ales Bialiatski was convicted because of his work to see human rights respected.
I urgently call upon the Belarusian Government to release him and all other political prisoners immediately.
The repression of non-governmental organisations, the opposition and independent media in Belarus must cease.
This applies particularly to the abolition of the death penalty.
The well-known human rights activist Ales Bialiatski is Vice President of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and President of Viasna, the leading human rights organisation in Minsk.
During the repression following the presidential elections in December 2010, Viasna notably provided support for political prisoners and their families.
His property was also confiscated.
Human rights defenders are under pressure from the state.
The authorities place obstacles in the way of non-governmental organisations and independent media with the aim of making it very hard for civil society representatives critical of the regime to do their work.
Belarus is the only European country that hands down and carries out death sentences.
Fundamental political freedoms in Belarus are restricted considerably.
The Government must commit itself wholeheartedly to upholding human rights and also respect them in practice!
The German Government is against capital punishment under any circumstances and, together with its EU partners, has campaigned actively for its abolition in Taiwan for some years.
It is incomprehensible that a mature democracy like Taiwan with generally high human rights standards should resort to such inhumane methods.
The Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid, Christoph Strässer, issued the following statement today (29 April) on the 1000th day since the imprisonment of human rights activist Ales Bialiatski:
In November 2011 Ales Bialiatski was sentenced to four and a half years’ imprisonment.
Visiting an air base within the framework of the Vienna Document (file photo)
Confidence-building, arms control and non-proliferation are cornerstones of German foreign and security policy.
It was adopted in 1990 after the end of the Cold War and underwent its last major revision in 2011.
The Vienna Document includes measures for increased transparency and confidence-building as well as mechanisms for peaceful conflict resolution.
All OSCE member states make use of this instrument of arms control cooperation.
The Federal Government therefore advocates ongoing development and modernisation of the Vienna Document within the OSCE.
This includes strengthening crisis response mechanisms and improving the transparency of armed forces and their activities.
Here you can consult the 2011 Vienna Document in German:
It was updated three times during the 1990s (1992, 1994 and 1999).
Inspections in so-called “specified areas” in order to determine whether military activities are taking place in these areas.
The inspection team is permitted to inspect the specified area on the ground and from the air.
The team is accompanied by representatives of the receiving State.
Evaluations of units at their normal peacetime locations.
It dates back to 1975, the year in which the CSCE (Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe) Final Act was signed in Helsinki.
The further negotiations on confidence- and security-building measures culminated in the signing of the Vienna Document in 1990 after the end of the Cold War.
In 2012 and 2013 minor amendments to the Vienna Document were adopted.
The participating OSCE states can conduct confidence-building inspections on the ground to check transmitted information and compliance with the provisions of the Vienna Document.
These inspection trips, which take place under the auspices of the OSCE on the basis of the Vienna Document, have been conducted since the 1990s.
They are arranged in consultation with the host country and communicated to all OSCE member states.
Each OSCE member state is therefore informed in advance of each individual mission planned.
Federal Armed Forces Verification Centre coordinates German contribution
It also guarantees the proper conduct of such missions by other States Parties in Germany, provides the necessary personnel for these tasks and analyses the results of the inspections and monitoring visits.
In Germany the Federal Armed Forces Verification Centre (ZVBw) plans, coordinates and conducts all missions abroad involving Germany on the basis of the Vienna Document.
You can download a PDF file of the 1999 Vienna Document here:
Binding for all OSCE member states
Vienna Document: Confidence through transparency
The Vienna Document is a key instrument of arms control and confidence-building between the 57 OSCE member states.
Exchange of detailed information
“On-the-ground” inspections under the auspices of the OSCE
The inspections are performed unarmed.
They facilitate transparency with regard to military activities in the OSCE area and thus help build confidence between the OSCE member states.
The participating States meet once a year in Vienna to discuss current practical implementation issues concerning the Vienna Document at the Annual Implementation Assessment Meeting (AIAM).
Böhmer hands antiquities back to Egypt
Minister of State Böhmer has returned to Egypt antiquities illegally imported into Germany.
Minister of State Böhmer and Ambassador Higazy in conversation
“Review 2014 – A Fresh Look at German Foreign Policy” Texte für Start der Webseite
Why “Review 2014 – A Fresh Look at German Foreign Policy”?
Crises and conflicts both close to home and further afield are creating new challenges for foreign and security policy.
Globalisation and the emergence of new powers are changing the map of the world.
Germany is facing new risks and increasing expectations.
At the European regional conference, the German Ambassadors to the European Union member states discussed issues key to Europe’s future.
At the European regional conference, the German Ambassadors to the European Union member states discussed issues key to Europe’s future.
What do these changes mean for foreign policy?
Steinmeier in discussion with the Ambassadors
Stefan Lehne from the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace took part in the subsequent discussion, which focused on the European Neighbourhood Policy against the backdrop of the crisis in Ukraine.
Discussion about a social Europe
Minister of State Roth at the discussion with Germany’s EU Ambassadors
Following this, Germany’s Minister of State for Europe, Michael Roth, answered questions from the Ambassadors.
during which the crisis in Ukraine was the first topic to be discussed.
The German Foreign Minister emphasised to the German Ambassadors that in light of the latest developments in eastern Ukraine, it was not yet sure that it would be possible to avoid new rifts in Europe.
They then went on to discuss the future of the European Union.
In addition to this the Ambassadors debated the role of German missions abroad in communicating Germany’s European policy goals.
Do we in Germany and Europe have the right resources in a world of new complexities?
Are we doing the right thing, and are we doing it with the right instruments?
And you have the chance to have your say, by leaving comments on the experts' articles or on blog entries, by taking part in the debate on Twitter or by attending one of the discussions.
Our logo:
This map, which was drawn up by Richard Buckminster Fuller back in the 1950s, shows the earth from an unusual perspective:
Discussion at the working lunch
The enduring importance of Franco-German relations to Europe played a major role in the discussion, as did the significant impetus provided to European policy by the Weimar Triangle, consisting of Germany, France and Poland.
Minister of State Böhmer with the three antiquities
This forces us to rethink our customary reference points and contrasts, such as North-South or West-East.
Further information about the map and its creator can be found on the Buckminister Fuller Institute website:
What priorities and focuses should Germany set in its foreign policy?
EU Ambassadors Conference at the Federal Foreign Office
In a discussion with Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier, the future of Europe and the ongoing crisis in Ukraine were at the top of the agenda.
At the beginning of the regional conference on 30 April, the nearly 30 heads of the German missions in the European Union were welcomed by State Secretary Markus Ederer and Martin Kotthaus, Head of the European Directorate-General at the Federal Foreign Office.
Their in-depth exchange of views addressed the European Parliament elections in May as well as deeper integration in the eurozone.
Europe’s role in the world, the improvement of European energy security, the planned Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) between the EU and the United States and the challenges facing a “social Europe” were all addressed during the multifaceted discussion.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier met the participants of the regional conference for a working lunch,
On the topic of overcoming the European public debt crisis, the Foreign Minister underlined that despite continuing problems, the crisis-hit countries were now on the path to recovery.
Long-term stabilisation of the European economic and monetary union
As the conference came to a conclusion, European economic topics were addressed once again –
the focus of the round of talks lay on the efforts towards a European banking union as well as the challenges for the long-term stabilisation of the economic and monetary union.
She thanked the customs for doing a splendid job as well as the other German authorities whose work had paved the way for the handover.
What values does German foreign policy represent?
Thanks to their efforts, the antiquities would soon once again be back in Egypt and accessible to the public.
How do foreign policy goals and interests affect me personally?
Who are Germany's most important partners and allies?
Can I have a say in foreign policy decisions?
And the debate on the hows, whys and wherefores of German foreign policy should take place right at the heart of society.
Trailer with Foreign Minister for website
Foreign policy is everyone’s business.
The miniature obelisk, the oldest of the three, dated back to the third millenium B.C., she explained, and would have originally adorned the entrance to a tomb.
The “Review 2014 - A Fresh Look at German Foreign Policy” project initiated by Foreign Minister Steinmeier aims to set in motion a broad debate in society on the objectives, interests and prospects of Germany's foreign policy.
We would like to join with interested members of the public and civil society to take a critical look at Germany's foreign relations, including the work of the Federal Foreign Office.
We invite you to comment on and discuss the articles on this website by academics and prominent figures from home and abroad.
You can also continue the debate on Twitter under the hashtag #review2014.
Sign up to receive our newsletter and take part in our regular surveys, or have a look at the videos of key foreign policy debates.
The blog lets you bring yourself up to date with news, events and surveys.
Guest comments will also be published here regularly.
Being willing to take part doesn't mean you necessarily agree with everything.
we look forward to your criticism.
In your opinion, what's the most important aim of German foreign policy?
freedom
prosperity
In terms of Germany's role in world politics, there are two contrasting views.
Which view do you take?
Some people say that given its political past and
Others say that given its political and economic importance and its global links Germany should now play a more active role and shoulder greater responsibility in global politics.
Which alliance is the most important for Germany?
EU (European Union)
NATO (North Atlantic Treaty Organization)
Which of these views best matches your own?
NATO is still vital
NATO is no longer needed
NATO is important, but Germany doesn't need to go along with everything
One click of the mouse online, one holiday, one semester abroad or one business contact, and we’re out in the world before we know it.
Crises and dangers are closer to us too though – even reaching right into Europe recently, thinking about the Ukraine crisis.
if foreign policy has an affect on all of us, then all of us should have our affect on foreign policy.
Should we keep out of things?
What are we prepared to do for peace in Europe, in the world?
What do others expect of us?
was inscribed with votive prayers; the central niche would have contained the statue of a god.
What are our limits?
There are no easy answers.
That’s the idea behind Review 2014.
We are probably a little too big, and too densely connected to our neighbourhood for just staying out of things to be the solution.
Please, make your voices heard.
Fighting international trafficking in cultural property
Together, we can take a fresh look at German foreign policy.
What does globalisation mean for my family?
Family monument
from ancient Egypt
Böhmer also highlighted the harm done by international trafficking in cultural property.
What values do we Germans stand for?
Which choices in German diplomacy can affect my life?
Can I influence what foreign policy focuses on?
What tools can foreign policy use?
Can I have a say in foreign-policy decisions?
How can I take part in foreign-policy decisions?
How does globalisation affect me?
What does the rise of new global players mean for us?
Who are Germany’s partners and allies?
Which alliances are important for me?
What part does humanitarian assistance play in foreign policy?
Does conflict prevention affect me?
And what’s crisis response all about?
What’s the role of the United Nations in foreign policy?
Where does foreign policy touch on NATO?
The world is changing at an astonishing rate.
You can also find information about discussion events throughout Germany at which representatives of the Federal Foreign Office will debate international issues with members of the public. This information will be updated continuously.
German foreign policy – a controversial discussion
The authors present their personal responses to the questions “What, if anything, is wrong with German foreign policy? What needs to be changed?” and make their own recommendations. These “views from outside” look at very different topics, such as Germany's role in the world and in Europe, Germany's partners, the importance of human rights and the shaping of the international order.
The opening event to launch the public dialogue will take place at the Federal Foreign Office on 20 May and will be live streamed on the FFO website.
From then until the autumn, numerous events will be held all over the country to enable civil society representatives to debate German foreign policy.
In an essay competition students will be invited to set out their views and ideas on German foreign policy.
Foreign policy should not remain an elite concern. Join in the discussion and let us know what you think – offline and online.
previous power politics Germany should continue to exercise restraint in global affairs.
decisions, public opinion, focus, foreign events, possibilities, diplomacy, responses, objectives and interests, values, globalisation, rise of new global players, international partners, EU, NATO, United Nations, alliances, future, human rights, humanitarian assistance, crisis prevention, crisis response, globalisation, G20, G8, education and culture, research, cyber, energy, international schools, peacekeeping, international schools
Human Rights, Alliances, Globalisation, NATO, Research, Diplomacy, Future
What are the foreign policy issues for the future?
UNO (United Nations)
Some people say that NATO is still vital for Germany's security,
others that NATO is not needed any more.
Far away is closer than we might think.
The world is changing at an astonishing rate.
Everything is interconnected.
... a school exchange or a bit of online surfing...
... the daily shop or trade on the global markets, perhaps with German goods...
... or the most important basis of our coexistence in the world, our efforts for peace and security.
We are living in an age of globalisation; above all though, we are living off globalisation.
So that those questions receive proper attention, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier has launched Review 2014 – A Fresh Look at German Foreign Policy.
This is the place for discussion, for questions and answers!
This is where you can show what’s important to you.
Put forward your questions, ideas and suggestions.
Your comments and discussions are needed here.
The reflections of international and German experts on German foreign policy are being collated on our website.
Information about the review process and other activities will be provided on the website and on Twitter.
Externer Link, öffnet in neuem FensterBrochure:
Illegal trade in cultural property is threatening humanity’s cultural heritage
At events across Germany, experts and Federal Foreign Office representatives will join you to discuss the hows, whys and wherefores of German foreign policy.
Move a step closer to the decisions that affect us all.
Let’s take a fresh look at German foreign policy together.
This may sound banal, but every shirt we put on, every meal we eat has seen far-flung corners of the earth.
We want to know what you expect of Germany’s foreign policy.
Should we get involved?
If yes, which measures should be used?
So we need to put our heads together – but not just the professionals!
I want to hear your opinion, too.
On our website, on Twitter and at our events across the country.
When something happens in another country, what can we do/when do we need to respond?
How can foreign policy advance human rights?
Is research an important field for me?
Minister of State Böhmer hands three antiquities back to Egypt
At a ceremony at the Federal Foreign Office Minister of State Böhmer handed over antiquities from Egypt that had been illegally imported into Germany.
Böhmer and Higazy with freshly signed handover certificates
Following rulings by the German courts that they should be returned to Egypt, they were handed over at a special ceremony held at the Federal Federal Foreign Office.
At the start of the ceremony Minister of State Böhmer spoke her mind about the current political situation in Egypt, which she described as “extremely difficult and disquieting”.
She believed it was very important right now for both sides to continue their dialogue and go on talking.
Three antiquities with an “amazing story”
At the handover ceremony Minister of State Böhmer expressed her delight that the three objects, testimony to a great and ancient civilisation, were now returning to Egypt, where they would be accessible to the public.
The “amazing story” of these objects, which had been smuggled into Germany five years ago, had now found a happy end, she noted.
This means that developments in foreign affairs can affect our day-to-day lives – so we need everyone's input!
Whether it's European politics or a trip abroad...
The constant growth in connections and ramifications throws up new questions in foreign affairs.
The review process is intended to spark public debate about the objectives and conditions of Germany’s foreign policy.
He thanked Minister of State Böhmer for her valuable contribution to German-Egyptian relations.
Not only with this particular handover but in other ways as well Germany plays an active part in the fight against trafficking in cultural property.
The German Government would continue to do everything in its power, she added, to clamp down on illicit practices in this area.
The three art works are a family monument, a statue shrine and a miniature obelisk.
She has also condemned the death sentences passed on 683 members of the Muslim Brotherhood.
She also condemned the death sentences handed down on Monday on 683 members of the Muslim Brotherhood.
On Wednesday (30 April) Minister of State Böhmer handed over three antiquities originating from Egypt to the country’s ambassador, Dr Mohamed Higazy.
German Government strongly condemns 683 death sentences
Following the death sentences passed on Monday in the Upper Egyptian town of Menia on 683 members of the Muslim Brotherhood, she had wondered whether the ceremony should go ahead, she continued.
Recalling the comments made by Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier (29 April), Böhmer made clear that “the verdicts totally contravene everything we mean by the rule of law”.
The German Government accordingly wanted to see “the verdicts quashed and the defendants receive a fair trial”.
The Egyptian ambassador had given her a verbal assurance that he would convey this message to the Egyptian authorities, Böhmer added.
At the behest of Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier the ambassador was yesterday (29 April) summoned to the Federal Foreign Office.
The day before (28 April) Foreign Minister Steinmeier had noted that the hundreds of death sentences “go against everything that we understand by the rule of law”.
The Egyptian authorities were running the risk of further destabilising the country and cementing the polarisation of politics and society in the run-up to the presidential elections due in May, Steinmeier pointed out.
Professor of Egyptology Friederike Seyfried provided further background on the three objects – a miniature obelisk, a statue shrine and a so-called family monument – which are all thought to be from the Saqqara region.
The family monument (650 B.C.) decorated with 13 figures had served as a kind of family tree.
The statue shrine from the second millenium B.C.
Not only the destruction of cultural objects and antique sites, but also illegal digging and the looting and illicit export of cultural objects did irreparable damage to a nation’s cultural heritage, she warned.
In his comments at the ceremony, Egyptian Ambassador Higazy praised the return of the antiquities as “proof of the integrity” of Germany’s authorities.
The court ruling giving the go-ahead for the handover had been the culmination of a joint collaborative effort.
Böhmer emphasised Germany’s commitment to the 1970 UNESCO Convention in this connection.
Speech by Minister of State Böhmer on 30 April
The detained OSCE inspectors, four of them German nationals, are now free.
Amongst them are four Germans and a Dane.
The Norwegian Government’s guesthouse lies behind the palace in the centre of town.
Yet the priority lies clearly on international affairs:
“My congratulations on the appointment of a Norwegian as the new Secretary General of NATO.”
Norway is not a member but does belong to the European Economic Area.
amongst them are four Germans and a Dane.
For both Ministers this is a crisis meeting, however:
“I want to say on a positive note that it is indeed one of Europe’s merits that we are able to make arrangements and meet here spontaneously.”
The danger is not yet over in eastern Ukraine:
This is a very serious situation and we are of course very concerned about the wellbeing of the people detained in Slavyansk.
The tragedy in Odessa must be a wake-up call!
Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement in Berlin this morning (3 May):
Ministers Steinmeier and von der Leyen have expressed relief and thanked everyone involved in negotiating their release.
I am shocked and horrified at the painful death of so many people in the terrible fire in Odessa.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier and Defence Minister Ursula von der Leyen expressed their relief and thanked everyone involved in negotiating their release.
In the evening the inspectors landed at Berlin-Tegel airport.
Von der Leyen and Steinmeier
The tragedy in Odessa must be a wake-up call!
Violence breeds only violence.
This starts with their choice of words:
During the morning the OSCE had confirmed the release of the entire team of twelve inspectors.
Difficult negotiations right up to the last
I was deeply shocked to learn of the terrible devastation caused by a landslide which claimed the lives of more than two thousand people in the Afghan province of Badakhshan.
Our thoughts are with the victims of this natural disaster and their loved ones.
The German Government is in contact with the Afghan authorities and will help wherever possible to alleviate the suffering of those affected.
Under these circumstances Steinmeier and von der Leyen were particularly pleased that the efforts to secure the release of the entire team, including also the Ukrainian officers, had been successful.
The situation is currently being assessed in close coordination with Afghan agencies and international organisations with a view to establishing the concrete need for assistance.
The inspectors were flown back by the Bundeswehr.
The negotiations had been difficult right up to the last, Foreign Minister Steinmeier explained in Berlin. Several times it had looked as if they might end in failure.
The unit’s latest meeting on Friday had been chaired by the Minister.
On Saturday evening the German members of the team and their colleagues from other countries landed in Berlin and were met by their families.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier emphasised:
Steinmeier and von der Leyen explicitly thanked everyone involved for their tireless efforts over the past week.
They paid tribute both to the OSCE negotiating team and to the Federal Foreign Office crisis unit.
The talks focused on the crisis in Ukraine.
The talks with Erna Solberg address bilateral relations, as well as the crisis in Ukraine.
The trip then continues on from Oslo to Copenhagen, to a meeting with Denmark’s Minister for Foreign Affairs Martin Lidegaard organised at short notice.
OSCE flag
“Above all, we are of course particularly concerned about the situation in Ukraine.”
Foreign Minister Steinmeier in Norway
German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier undertook his first official visit to Norway’s capital, Oslo, on 28/29 April 2014.
There he met with Prime Minister Erna Solberg and exchanged views with his opposite number, Børge Brende.
Steinmeier also met the NATO Secretary General designate Jens Stoltenberg with whom he discussed issues relating to the transatlantic military alliance.
Following his trip to Oslo, Steinmeier made a spontaneous pit-stop in Copenhagen to discuss the situation of the military inspectors detained in Slavyansk in eastern Ukraine with his counterpart Martin Lidegaard.
On 28 April the Norwegian capital welcomes its guests with glorious sunshine.
Today the German Foreign Minister is travelling to Oslo for his first official visit – first stop is the Office of the Prime Minister.
Here Foreign Minister Steinmeier receives a warm welcome – and has a meeting with his counterpart Børge Brende in the garden.
In their discussion, both Ministers highlight the good cooperation between Norway and Germany – in the area of politics as well as, for example, in the energy sector.
The NATO partner Norway will take on an even more prominent role in the future, as:
And Steinmeier meets the NATO Secretary General designate the very next morning.
The former Norwegian Prime Minister Jens Stoltenberg will take up his position in Brussels at the beginning of October.
He already discusses issues relating to the transatlantic defence alliance and the conflict in Ukraine with Foreign Minister Steinmeier.
Last stop in Oslo – the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Here, Foreign Minister Steinmeier talks to Vidar Helgesen, Minister of EEA and EU Affairs about the cooperation between Norway and the EU.
Here the topic is the OSCE military inspectors who are being detained in eastern Ukraine:
His concerns not yet alleviated, Foreign Minister Steinmeier travels from Copenhagen back to Berlin on 29 April.
Steinmeier had repeatedly pointed out that the ongoing negotiations under OSCE auspices had the German Government’s full backing.
The situation was in fact continuing to escalate.
As a mediating and impartial institution, the OSCE therefore had a crucial role to play in Ukraine.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier on the release of the OSCE observers
For more on Defence Minister von der Leyen’s remarks click here
Joint press conference by Foreign Minister Steinmeier and Defence Minister von der Leyen in VIDEO
Foreign Minister Steinmeier on the deadly landslide in Badakhshan/Afghanistan
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier issued the following statement in Berlin today (3 May):
On 2 May, several landslides occurred in Badakhshan province in which many people lost their lives.
At present, it is estimated that more than 2000 people died.
The German Embassy in Kabul and the Consulate-General in Mazar-e-Sharif are supporting the coordination measures in Kabul and in the northern regions.
Federal Foreign Minister Steinmeier on the fire in Odessa:
We extend our condolences and our profound sympathy to the victims and their families, to Ukraine and to the people of Odessa.
I condemn in the strongest possible terms the outbreaks of violence in Odessa and other towns and cities in eastern and southern Ukraine, where demonstrators are attacking each other uninhibitedly and will stop at nothing, not even murder and manslaughter.
If nothing is done to put an end to it now, the moment may come when it will simply be unstoppable.
That is why those in positions of political responsibility, on all sides, must not pour further oil on the flames.
bellicose war rhetoric will only make everything even worse.
I am pleased and very relieved to be able to inform you that all the OSCE inspectors, including the four Germans, who were detained by separatists in Slavyansk in eastern Ukraine eight days ago have been released.
The team of inspectors is now being looked after by our support team led by the Federal Foreign Office’s Crisis Management Commissioner.
I am particularly pleased that we were able to secure the release of the entire team, including the Ukrainian officers.
First impressions suggest that they are in as good shape as can be expected under the circumstances.
The negotiations on the release of the OSCE inspectors were difficult and several times it looked like they might end in failure.
The happy end to the hostage-taking is the result of persistent, dedicated diplomacy by a great many people  and it is therefore very important to me to sincerely thank all of those who helped to bring  this about:
I also want to express my gratitude for this.
We are far from reaching an end to the crisis in Ukraine.
Quite the contrary, the situation continues to escalate, especially with regard to yesterday’s events, with regard to the outbreaks of violence in Odessa and in other cities in eastern and southern Ukraine, where demonstrators attacked each other unchecked, where public buildings continue to be occupied, where murder and manslaughter has been committed.
Human Rights Commissioner Strässer visits Malaysia and Myanmar
Over the past few days the German Government had worked closely with the OSCE negotiating team.
Furthermore, Christoph Strässer will have talks with representatives of the government and opposition in order to gain an impression of the human rights situation in Malaysia and discuss the German Government’s human rights policy and its practical implementation on the ground with the German missions in South-East Asia.
The OSCE inspectors held against their will in Slavyansk in eastern Ukraine were released on Saturday (3 May).
Clearly relieved after receiving confirmation that the OSCE inspectors detained in Slavyansk were now free, Foreign Minister Steinmeier and Defence Minister von der Leyen gave a joint press conference on Saturday (3 May).
The inspectors were now being looked after by a German support team led by the Federal Foreign Office’s Crisis Management Commissioner, they noted.
At Steinmeier’s behest, the Federal Foreign Office had established a crisis unit as soon as news came in that the observers – four of them German nationals – were being held against their will.
Crisis unit meeting chaired by Foreign Minister Steinmeier (2 May)
Tireless efforts by all concerned
Today’s happy end to the hostage-taking, however, is the result of persistent, dedicated diplomacy by a great many people.
The two ministers also noted how much they appreciated the role Russian representative Vladimir Lukin had played in this connection.
A key factor in this positive outcome had also been the cooperation with Ukraine’s leaders and authorities, Steinmeier added.
Great expertise and courage
On Friday (2 May) Steinmeier had conferred in this connection with Didier Burkhalter, current OSCE Chairperson-in-Office and President of the Swiss Confederation.
Over the past week the German Government had been in close contact with the Russian and Ukrainian Governments as well as the OSCE and made use of all possible channels in the interest of securing the detainees’ prompt release.
Earlier in the week Steinmeier had pledged that “we are doing everything in our power to secure the release of the detainees and ensure that they can return to their tasks in good health and as soon as possible.”
Tragedy in Odessa must be a wake-up call
On Saturday (3 May) Steinmeier and von der Leyen also made clear that the crisis in Ukraine was still far from over.
In the light of the latest acts of violence in Odessa and other cities in eastern and southern Ukraine, Steinmeier declared:
If this spiral of violence is not stopped now, there may come a moment when unchecked violence will have free rein.
So I appeal to all political leaders to stop fanning the flames further, end bellicose rhetoric, and resume the quest for a political solution to the Ukraine conflict.
Von der Leyen also pointed out that in view of the elections planned in Ukraine for 25 May it was in everyone’s interest to strengthen the OSCE and support it in fulfilling its mission.
She explained that particularly “in regions we are concerned about” it was the OSCE’s job to “ensure transparency and mutual confidence”.
The Commissioner will also visit Rakhine State to meet representatives of the local government and of the Buddhist and Muslim communities and will tour a camp for internally displaced persons.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement at the Federal Foreign Office today (3 May) on the release of the OSCE inspectors:
First of all the OSCE negotiation team in Donetsk, headed by Mark Etherington, which showed great skill and courage in dealing with the separatists, then the OSCE, under the leadership of Didier Burkhalter, with whom we coordinated very closely on a daily basis, and last but not least the German support team in Donetsk and the crisis unit here in the Federal Foreign Office which have literally been working day and night for over a week.
The great personal efforts made by Vladimir Lukin and in recent days Russia’s helpful contribution, alongside the cooperation with the Ukrainian leadership and authorities on the ground, were vital to the positive result achieved today.
The positive outcome for the team of inspectors means we can finally breathe a sigh of relief, but our work is not yet over.
I hope that for all concerned yesterday’s tragedy in Odessa that left over 40 people dead will be a wake-up call and remind everyone that violence only provokes counter-violence.
The award honours German coaches and players whose activities abroad have contributed to Germany’s good reputation around the world.
This year’s nominees are Winfried Schäfer, Monika Staab and Klaus Stärk.
Situation in Ukraine
Bild: Crisis unit meeting chaired by Foreign Minister Steinmeier (2 May)
In close coordination with Germany’s European and international partners, Foreign Minister Steinmeier is seeking intensively to bring about a peaceful resolution to the crisis.
Following the violent clashes between 18 and 20 February 2014, Ukraine is experiencing a period of upheaval.
Click here for an overview of the latest reports, articles and interviews on this issue on our website:
Part of its territory has been annexed by Russia in violation of international law.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier to honour German Football Ambassador 2014 and open “Football Spanning the Globe” exhibition
At a ceremony at the Federal Foreign Office on Monday, 5 May 2014, at 5.00 p.m. the German Football Ambassador prize will be awarded for the second time. Foreign Minister Steinmeier will be present.
An additional “People’s Choice” award will also be presented on Monday to one of eleven prominent German players abroad on this year’s shortlist.
The award ceremony also marks the start of the exhibition "Football Spanning the Globe", which will be on show in the Federal Foreign Office atrium from 5 May to 18 July.
Ahead of the FIFA World Cup Brazil kicking off in a few weeks’ time, the exhibition highlights how important football is for a country’s image.
In the south and east of the country, there have been – in some cases violent – confrontations and also fighting between Ukrainian security forces and pro-Russian groups for weeks now.
State visit to the Czech Republic
Human Rights Commissioner on World Press Freedom Day
The present day is intended to remind us of the overwhelming importance of press freedom, not just in Germany, but all around the world.
Together with the Czech President, the Federal President will visit Theresienstadt Memorial and then proceed to the Ghetto Museum.
Christoph Strässer, the Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid, issued the following statement today (3 May), on World Press Freedom Day:
Press freedom enables the media to serve as an independent source of information, uncovering injustices and thereby helping to uphold and preserve states built on democratic values.
This is true not only with regard to the traditional print media, but also and quite particularly with respect to the Internet.
The chance to disseminate information through the Internet is an opportunity that has already been seized in many ways.
Christoph Strässer, Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid, will be visiting Malaysia and Myanmar from 5 to 15 May 2014.
In Malaysia, he will take part in a regional seminar on human rights and discuss key human rights issues, such as human trafficking, freedom of the media or land grabbing, with human rights activists from the region.
In Myanmar, the Commissioner will exchange views with high-ranking representatives of the government, the legislative and the judiciary and also discuss the development of the national peace process with members of the opposition, including Aung San Suu Kyi.
In addition, he will hold talks in Yangon with, among others, the National Human Rights Commission, UNICEF, ICRC, UNDP, UNFPA and AICHR and meet human rights activists and representatives of civil society as well as German organisations and EU embassies.
It is indispensable if people are to form their own informed opinions and it is a guarantee against corruption.
Today we recall all those who are imprisoned in so many parts of the world for exercising this right, and, above all, we recall those who have paid with their lives for reporting frankly from the world’s trouble spots, such as the German journalist Anja Niedringhaus, who was recently murdered in Afghanistan.
Their dedication to freedom of the press as an institution is not only commendable, but also indispensable when it comes to combating undue state influence in the shaping of public opinion.
Wherever the printed press is subject to repression, recourse can be had to the Internet thanks to the anonymity it fortunately provides.
The three-day trip will focus on the close and friendly relations between our two countries as well as current European and foreign policy issues.
He will also meet Czech Prime Minister Bohuslav Sobotka, the President of the Chamber of Deputies, Jan Hamáček, and the President of the Senate, Milan Štĕch, for political talks.
Afterwards, he will tour the Škoda plant in Mladá Boleslav together with the Czech President and meet students and apprentices.
The Federal President will round off his visit with a discussion with pupils and civil society on how to deal with German-Czech history.
An overview of the state visit to the Czech Republic
Prague Castle:
Welcome with military honours by Miloš Zeman, President of the Czech Republic, then talks and a press conference
Wallenstein Palace:
Welcome by Milan Štĕch, President of the Senate of the Czech Republic, then luncheon with an address by the Federal President
Emmaus Monastery:
State banquet hosted by the President of the Czech Republic and Ivana Zemanová
Talks with Jan Hamáček, President of the Chamber of Deputies
Charles University:
Hrzan Palace (the Prime Minister’s residence):
Luncheon hosted by Bohuslav Sobotka, Prime Minister of the Czech Republic
Theresienstadt Memorial:
Visit together with the Czech President, afterwards visit by the Federal President to the Ghetto Museum
Lobkowicz Palace (German Embassy):
Reception hosted by the Federal President and Daniela Schadt
Visit to the Škoda plant with the Czech President, afterwards tour of the plant and discussion with students and apprentices at Škoda Auto
Talks with pupils and representatives of civil society on how to deal with German-Czech history
Flight back to Berlin
On the last day of his trip, the Federal President will take part in a discussion in the “Vaclav Havel European Dialogues” series.
Participation in a discussion in the “Vaclav Havel European Dialogues” series
Emergency aid to combat Ebola
The Federal Foreign Office is funding a Bernhard Nocht Institute laboratory to help fight the Ebola outbreak in West Africa.
From 4 to 7 May 2014, Federal President Joachim Gauck and his partner Daniela Schadt are paying a state visit to the Czech Republic.
President Gauck is meeting Miloš Zeman, the President of the Czech Republic, as well as representatives of Government, Parliament, the business community, academia, the cultural scene and the media.
On 5 May, the Federal President will be received with military honours by President Miloš Zeman.
On 6 May, President Gauck will give a speech at the Charles University in Prague on “Europe’s diversity – Europe’s asset”.
Sunday, 4 May 2014
Monday, 5 May 2014
Wreath-laying at the memorial
Vyšehrad, Church of St Peter and St Paul:
Welcome by the Archbishop of Prague, the Provost of the Royal Collegiate Church of St Peter and St Paul and members of the Ecumenical Council of Churches in the Czech Republic, joint guided tour of the Church of St Peter and St Paul as well as the graveyard.
Welcome by the Czech President and the Rector of the Charles University, followed by a ceremony during which the Federal President will be awarded the Gold Commemorative Medal of the Charles University. Afterwards speech by the Federal President on “Europe’s diversity – Europe’s asset”
Germany is providing emergency assistance in the fight against the Ebola virus.
The Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine (BNI) has been in action in West Africa since the outbreak of the Ebola crisis, in partnership with the World Health Organization (WHO).
The BNI is receiving 110,000 euros in laboratory funding in the context of the German Partnership Program for Excellence in Biological and Health Security.
The overall objective is to ensure swift and reliable diagnosis of Ebola fever and – after the current outbreak in Guinea has been contained – to make sure infectious material is stored safely in the long term, to prevent future risks.
See more photos in our gallery
Leaving from Munich airport
WHO vehicles transporting the team and equipment from the capital, Conakry, to Guéckédou in southern Guinea
Working in the lab tent
The lab team need to ensure all contaminated material is safely pack away and disposed of.
Rights of persons with disabilities
Steinmeier awards Football Ambassador prize
Summer camp for Down syndrome children in the Gaza Strip (file photo)
On 13 December 2006 the General Assembly adopted the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, together with an Optional Protocol aimed at establishing an individual complaints procedure.
This was a historic step which, under the auspices of the UN, gives people with disabilities comprehensive human rights protection against discrimination.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier presented an Honorary Award to legendary trainer Rudi Gutendorf.
Both documents were promptly signed by the German Government on 30 March 2007.
Following the deposit of the instrument of ratification in New York on 24 February 2009, the Convention and the Optional Protocol have been binding in Germany since 26 March 2009.
For the Convention text and more information, please click here:
www.un.org/disabilities
German Expert elected to Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
Matters covered by the Convention
Boy on a skateboard
André Schürrle and Monika Staab have been awarded the prize of Football Ambassador 2014 at the Federal Foreign Office.
Steinmeier awards Football Ambassador 2014 prize
Steinmeier opening the award ceremony for the Football Ambassador 2014
Foreign Minister Steinmeier presented an Honorary Award to legendary trainer Rudi Gutendorf for his years-long commitment.
The prize is awarded by the initiative German Football Ambassador, to which the Federal Foreign Office is a strategic partner.
Successful footballers had often been viewed as ambassadors for their countries, the Minister continued.
Germany had also gained trust and favour through football “which, today, we can build on around the world”.
Honouring legendary trainer Gutendorf
Steinmeier honours legendary trainer Gutendorf
In 1961 he was the first football expert to be sponsored by the Federal Foreign Office and today he is one of the initiative’s patrons.
Staab becomes Football Ambassador 2014, Schürrle receives People’s Choice award.
Steinmeier with award-winner Staab, in the background: Steffi Jones
The award of German Football Ambassador 2014 went to Monika Staab, who currently trains Qatar’s national women’s football team.
In her speech, the former national player Steffi Jones praised Monika Staab’s tireless commitment.
National football player André Schürrle received the People’s Choice Prize 2014 from London, via a live video link.
He managed to see off competitors Mesut Özil, Per Mertesacker and Nadine Angerer in the online vote.
Schürrle said that he was very proud to receive the award, especially given who the other candidates were.
The prize was awarded for the first time in 2013, when it went to national player Sami Khedira, sports journalist Holger Obermann and former Bundesliga trainer Dettmar Cramer.
Since then, every year the initiative German Football Ambassador honours a German trainer and footballer who have made a contribution to Germany’s positive image around the world through their international activities.
Exhibition “Football Spanning the Globe” at the Federal Foreign Office
A Brazilian samba band opens the award ceremony
Click here for more information:
international sports promotion
This universal Convention is intended to help people with disabilities enjoy a self-determined life and equal opportunities, and to participate fully in social, economic, political and cultural life.
Its aim is to protect people with disabilities from all forms of discrimination and any “handicaps” created by society.
In this way the now outdated principle of welfare is replaced by a recognition of disability as part of human diversity.
The rights and safeguards the Convention spells out include:
access to education
access to employment
participation in cultural life
the right to own and inherit property
a ban on discrimination in all matters relating to marriage
the right to have children, together with a ban on sterilisation on the grounds of disability
a ban on medical or scientific experiments on people with disabilities
a ban on torture
The Convention also strengthens the rights of women and children,
explicitly referring to the particular discrimination faced by women and girls with disabilities.
Since both time and major financial investment are required to give effect to all these rights, the Convention allows States Parties to realise them progressively, as funding permits.
Convention monitoring mechanisms
Parking bay for persons with disabilities
Helping to stabilise Lebanon
Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s talks with his counterpart Gebran Bassil focused on the situation in Lebanon in the light of the war in Syria and the large number of Syrian refugees.
Bild: Joint press conference: Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Bassil
Lebanon’s Foreign Minister Gebran Bassil has only been in office since February 2014.
However, it was not the first meeting between the two Foreign Ministers.
They first met at the conference of the International Support Group for Lebanon in Paris on 5 March.
examining the national reports States Parties must submit at regular intervals on Convention implementation,
receiving and examining individual complaints in accordance with the Optional Protocol,
researching credible cases of serious and systematic violations of the rights laid down in the Convention.
The Committee can also publish authoritative general recommendations and comments on obligations of States Parties arising from the Convention.
The meeting with his German opposite number, Frank-Walter Steinmeier, this morning was also his first official visit to the German capital.
Today’s talks in the Federal Foreign Office followed on from the meeting in March:
the talks focused on the situation in Lebanon.
This is marked by domestic challenges – a successor for the office of president has to be elected by the end of May – as well as the crisis in neighbouring Syria.
She was duly elected and has been a member of the Committee since 1 September 2010, and is standing for re-election this year.
National player Andre Schürrle, from FC Chelsea, and Monika Staab, trainer of Qatar’s national women’s football team have been honoured with the title “German Football Ambassador 2014” at the Federal Foreign Office in Berlin.
“Indeed diplomacy and football are closely linked”, stated Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier on Monday (5 May) at the award ceremony in the atrium of the Federal Foreign Office.
Steinmeier himself presented an honorary certificate to legendary trainer Rudi Gutendorf.
Gutendorf has coached more than 50 teams in his long career as a trainer and has worked, amongst other things, as the trainer of the national teams of Australia, China, Bolivia and Rwanda.
Since then, the Federal Foreign Office has supported more than 1,400 short and long-term projects in over 100 countries in a wide variety of different sports.
At the award ceremony Foreign Minister Steinmeier also opened the exhibition “Football Spanning the Globe” showing in the atrium of the Federal Foreign Office, to accompany the FIFA World Cup in Brazil.
The exhibition is free and open to interested members of the public from Monday to Friday, 10 a.m. to 6 p.m., until 18 July.
After their talks, Steinmeier and Bassil gave a joint press conference.
To discuss how the European dream can retain its radiance the European writers will be joined also by philosophers, academics and political practitioners from around the world.
Europe – Dream and Reality Foreign Minister Steinmeier joins discussions with European writers, philosophers and intellectuals
Foreign Minister Steinmeier will take part in all three events.
The European dream is not dreamed only by Europeans.
An independent monitoring authority responsible for overseeing national implementation of the Convention has been established within the German Institute for Human Rights.
Of course in some places the fulfilment of this dream still faces obstacles, yet people all over the world cherish the dream of freedom, democracy and the rule of law.
The Special Rapporteur reports to the Commission for Social Development on the implementation of the Standard Rules.
Since 13 August 2009 the post has been held by Shuaib Chalklen from South Africa.
For more information on the Special Rapporteur’s acitivities, go to
Externer Link, öffnet in neuem Fensterwww.un.org/esa
Externer Link, öffnet in neuem Fensterwww.un.org/disabilities/
Bild: Foreign Minister Bassil during his first official visit to Berlin
His job is to raise the profile of the issue worldwide and to help mainstream the rights of people with disabilities.
Germany’s role
The Syria conflict played a prominent role in the talks between the two Foreign Ministers.
Germany submitted its first national report on the implementation of the Convention to the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities early in September 2011.
The German Government is working both nationally and internationally to improve protection for people with disabilities and was actively involved from the outset in the drafting of a modern human rights convention designed to achieve this.
Civil society was closely involved in the negotiating process; a representative of the German Disability Council (Deutscher Behindertenrat) was a member of the German delegation and played an active role in the negotiations.
The Convention promotes national reform efforts, moreover, by
serving as a reference document and catalyst for progress.
National implementation of the Convention is coordinated by the national focal point in the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs.
He also stressed that Germany intended to continue helping Lebanon to master these challenges.
Since 2012 the German Government has provided some 100 million euros in humanitarian aid for Syrian refugees in Lebanon.
The German Foreign Minister concluded by emphasising that he wanted to continue his exchange with Gebran Bassil soon:
he was already looking forward to the next talks during his first visit to Beirut on 30 May.
talks with all sides
Steinmeier and Lavrov in Vienna
They are designed in particular to promote access to employment, mobility and education.
The influx of Syrian refugees has placed a great strain on the country.
Bilateral relations between Germany and Lebanon
Germany was represented at the meeting by Michael Roth, Minister of State for Europe.
Calling for a second Geneva meeting
For more information on the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs’ work towards increasing the participation of persons with disabilities, see
After his talks in Vienna, Germany’s Foreign Minister commented on the exacerbated situation in eastern and southern Ukraine as follows:
“Things cannot and must not go on as they have been in these last few days.”
Another Geneva conference, he said, now needed to put an end to the bloodshed and lay the groundwork for defusing the conflict.
which are due to be released in the summer of 2014.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier expressed his recognition to his Lebanese counterpart for the successful efforts to form a government of national unity.
He stated that the country had thus managed to avoid being drawn into the Syria crisis and to gain a chance for greater political stability.
As Syria’s neighbour, Lebanon is directly affected by the bloody crisis, which has been going on for more than three years now.
Germany is helping to provide for Syrian refugees
Foreign Minister Steinmeier expressed his understanding for the pressure which the large number of refugees placed on Lebanon. The United Nations estimates that the country, which has only four million inhabitants, has taken in one million refugees.
This included taking in Syrian refugees.
The country managed to form a new government under Prime Minister Tammam Salam in February 2014 following lengthy negotiations.
Salam’s government of national unity has the support of a broad alliance of all of the country’s political forces.
In particular, the security situation in the country has benefited from the cooperation among all parties and security forces to contain the impact of the civil war in the neighbouring country on Lebanon.
The National Action Plan is currently being subjected to scientific scrutiny for the first time.
which had been expanding its presence in Ukraine for several weeks and had representatives at many of the relevant hot spots.
The Foreign Minister went on to outline further steps to be taken to calm the conflict.
What was needed, he wrote, was for the four parties to send a “strong political signal” and show that they stand by what they agreed and will keep up their efforts to put the outcomes of the first Geneva meeting into practice.
Giving up was not an option, he wrote.
The conflict parties in Ukraine also, the article goes on, need to consult swiftly on constitutional reform
with the goal of actively involving all regions and social groups, and producing a viable consensus.
Moscow and Kyiv have a lot to lose
In Steinmeier’s words, we can only hope to succeed if all those involved are willing to go down such a road.
“Perhaps,” the Foreign Minister hopes, “the realisation that Russia and Ukraine doubtless have the most to lose should it not prove possible to turn the situation around now will help.”
The National Action Plan is to be updated and improved under the leadership of the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, taking into account these findings, the German Government’s report on participation and Germany’s first appearance before the Committee.
published in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung on 6 May 2014
More information on the situation in Ukraine
Germany is due to appear before the Committee in September 2014.
Externer Link, öffnet in neuem Fensterwww.un.org/News/
Right to freedom of sexual orientation
The WDR Europaforum will be held at the Federal Foreign Office on 8 May.
Further participants in the WDR Europaforum will include:
Michael Roth, Minister of State for Europe at the Federal Foreign Office, has issued an invitation to a preview of the film "In the Name of" by Polish director Małgorzata Szumowska at Cinema Paris.
Federal Chancellor Angela Merkel, the President of the European Parliament, Martin Schulz, EU Commission President José Manuel Barroso, Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán, Federal Finance Minister Schäuble, EU Energy Commissioner Oettinger and Members of the German Bundestag from various parties.
Prior to the screening Minister of State Roth will chair a discussion on the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and intersex (LGBTI) persons in Europe.
Further information can be found online at:
Under the motto “Europe – Dream and Reality” two high-level conferences in Berlin on 8 and 9 May will discuss the current state of Europe and explore in what new ways, beyond the normal business of politics, it can help shape the future.
At the European Writers Conference on Thursday, 8 May, forty authors from all over Europe will engage in outspoken and lively debate on Europe at the invitation of writers Mely Kiyak, Nicol Ljubić, Tilman Spengler and Antje Rávic Strubel as well as Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier.
The subsequent Long Night of European Literature in the evening of 8 May will offer all comers a chance to discover Europe’s literary and linguistic diversity for themselves at the various readings organised.
The presentation of a European writers manifesto is also planned.
The symposium “Europe – Dream and Reality” organised by the Alfred Herrhausen Society on Friday, 9 May, will discuss what makes the European model so attractive to people in other parts of the world.
Ahead of these events Steinmeier issued the following statement:
In 1988, shortly before the Iron Curtain was demolished, writers from all over Europe attending a conference in West Berlin dreamed the dream of a Europe united, free and at peace.
Today, too, it is vital not to lose sight of this dream.
For it can give us new heart at a time such as this, when it is the prevention of a new division of Europe that is at stake.
The movie focuses on Adam, a Catholic priest who lives in a remote Polish village and, particularly against the background of his faith, struggles to get to grips with his homosexuality.
Maria Böhmer, Minister of State at the Federal Foreign Office, will be presenting one of the prizes.
LGBTI rights in Europe:
Minister of State Roth’s invitation to film preview
Other participants will be Pascal Thibault, French journalist in Berlin and chairman of the Franco-German LGBTI association "Bleu Blanc Rose", and the Polish LGBTI activist and Warsaw city councillor Krystian Legierski.
The Polish film "In the Name of" [original title: "W imię ..."] shot in 2012 was an entry in the competition section of the 63rd Berlinale film festival in February 2013 and will shortly be released in Germany.
Before talking to Steinmeier, the men had taken part in the annual Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe in Vienna.
It was important, he wrote, to reach agreement on the conduct of the presidential elections, to give a new Ukrainian government democratic legitimacy, without which stability would not be possible.
As of 15 April 2014, 143 countries and the European Union have ratified the Convention; in 80 countries the Optional Protocol has also become binding.
The UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities thus applies to the European Union and its organs (European Parliament, Council, Commission, European Court of Justice and Court of Auditors) in the exercise of their competences.
The adoption of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities means that there is now a human rights convention giving most of the estimated one billion people in the world with physical or mental disabilities better access to their codified rights.
Based on central provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and on all subsequent UN human rights agreements, the Convention spells out and elucidates universally valid human rights from the viewpoint of people with disabilities.
the right to a barrier-free environment
The Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities is responsible under the Convention, at UN level, for monitoring how States Parties give effect to these rights.
Germany actively supported the candidature of Professor Theresia Degener, a German expert, to serve on the Committee.
In 1993 the UN General Assembly adopted the Standard Rules on the Equalisation of Opportunities for Persons with Disabilities and created the post of Special Rapporteur on Disability.
On 19 December 2013, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon appointed Lenín Voltaire Moreno Garces, who had served as Vice-President of Ecuador from 2007 to 2013, as his Special Envoy on Disability and Accessibility.
Germany was thus one of the Convention’s pacesetters within the EU, acting as the EU’s chief negotiator for key draft articles.
The Convention's goals must however be upheld and promoted across all policy fields and at all political levels.
On 15 June 2011 the German Government presented its National Action Plan to implement the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
In line with its central tenet of inclusion, the National Action Plan lists some 200 concrete measures relating to all areas of life to be implemented by various ministries.
Over the course of the next decade Germany’s around 9.6 million people with disabilities should see their lives change considerably for the better.
Implementation and procedures will be optimised in the light of the findings of this evaluation,
Previously, Foreign Minister Steinmeier used a guest article for a German daily to advocate giving the OSCE a greater role in the Ukraine crisis and warn against a “war in eastern Europe”.
Composed of eighteen experts, who are drawn fairly from among the various regions of the world and are elected to serve a four-year term, the Committee has three basic functions:
The UN Convention reflects at international level a paradigm shift in policy towards people with disabilities, a shift which in Germany began in particular with the adoption of the Ninth Book of the Social Code on 19 June 2001 and the Act on Equal Opportunities for Disabled Persons of 27 April 2002.
Lebanon: Chance for political stability
Foreign Minister Bassil reaffirmed Lebanon’s greatest problem was the large number of Syrian refugees.
Steinmeier favours greater role for OSCE
In view of the difficult situation in Ukraine, Foreign Minister Steinmeier has met his Ukrainian and Russian counterparts as well as OSCE Chairperson-in-Office Didier Burkhalter for talks in Vienna.
In view of the dramatic developments in eastern and southern Ukraine, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier flew to Vienna at short notice on Tuesday (6 May) for talks with the Ukrainian and Russian Foreign Ministers, Andriy Deshchytsia and Sergey Lavrov, as well as Didier Burkhalter, Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE).
Seeking de-escalation:
In the conference centre at Vienna airport, Steinmeier first met Russia’s Foreign Minister Lavrov.
Afterwards, he consulted with his Ukrainian opposite number, Foreign Minister Deshchytsia, as well as President Burkhalter of Switzerland, the current OSCE Chairperson-in-Office, on possibilities for greater international involvement to help de-escalate the situation in Ukraine.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier with his Ukrainian counterpart, Andriy Deshchytsia
Foreign Minister Steinmeier had previously called for Ukraine, Russia, the United States and the European Union to meet again in Vienna, in his article for a German newspaper.
Strengthening the OSCE in the Ukraine crisis
Foreign Minister Steinmeier speaking to OSCE Chairperson-in-Office Didier Burkhalter
In his article, Steinmeier also advocated determinedly continuing all endeavours to de-escalate the situation.
Admitting that the international community no longer had a broad range of instruments at its disposal in Ukraine, he pointed to the OSCE as a seasoned, respected organisation on the ground
It points out that the OSCE can help set up forums for dialogue at every level
and that efforts to disarm non-state groups and clear public buildings and squares throughout the country must be continued.
The talks in Vienna allowed Foreign Minister Steinmeier to gauge that willingness.
“Giving up is not an option” – an article by Foreign Minister Steinmeier on developments in Ukraine,
Slavyansk –
OSCE observers released
International Support Group for Lebanon – meeting in Paris on 5 March 2014
In April 2014, the number of refugees registered by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in Lebanon, a nation with only four million inhabitants, reached one million.
Council of Europe building
In 2014 it celebrates its 65th anniversary.
It is based in Strasbourg, France.
From the start the Council of Europe has worked steadily to promote human rights, the rule of law and democracy throughout Europe.
Serious violations of these obligations may incur sanctions, including even termination of membership.
the Committee of Ministers
the Parliamentary Assembly
the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities
Foreign Minister Steinmeier takes part in WDR Europaforum at the Federal Foreign Office
This will be the seventeenth time the broadcasting station Westdeutscher Rundfunk has invited high-level politicians from across Europe for a day of controversial debate.
In the run-up to the European elections on 25 May, questions relating to the future shaping of the European integration process and current challenges facing Europe will be of particular relevance.
In the morning, Foreign Minister Steinmeier will be debating Germany’s role in global politics with Andreas Cichowicz (NDR) and Ulrich Deppendorf (ARD Berlin studio) under the heading “European policy – crisis policy”.
Guests will be welcomed to the Europaforum by WDR Director General Tom Buhrow and Minister of State for Europe Michael Roth.
where you can also read Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s speech.
In the evening, following the WDR Europaforum, the Civis Media Prize 2014, Europe’s media prize for integration, will be awarded at the Federal Foreign Office.
It is entitled to make recommendations and has a number of important decision-making powers.
Six other countries – Canada, the Holy See, Israel, Japan, Mexico and the United States – have observer status.
Promoting shared values
The institutions of the Council of Europe are
The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) is a forum for parliamentary debate.
Individuals in Council of Europe member countries can appeal directly to the ECHR if they believe their country has violated their rights under the European Convention on Human Rights.
Since 1 October 2009 it has been headed by Secretary General Thorbjørn Jagland, a Norwegian national.
The Council of Europe has played a trailblazing role in creating a binding pan-European legal framework  for the protection of human rights, the rule of law and democracy.
The more than 200 Council of Europe conventions and protocols now in effect include such groundbreaking instruments as the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR), the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Anti-Torture Convention), the European Social Charter, the European Charter of Local Self-Government, the European Cultural Convention as well as the Conventions on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings, on the Protection of Children and on Preventing and Combating Violence Against Women.
Usually also third countries may accede to them.
Council of Europe partial agreements
The Council of Europe and the EU
The EU and the Council of Europe work closely together and continue to expand their cooperation.
Overview of all Council of Europe conventions
The accession process made important headway in 2013 and further headway is expected this year.
Council of Europe website
The festival will provide an extensive supporting programme throughout the city over a period of four weeks under the motto: “Look back, think forward”.
Who or what is Europe?
Do we need a new vision of Europe?
European Writers Conference:
A dream of Europe
HISTORY CAMPUS – EUROPE 14|14 Foreign Minister Steinmeier  to have discussion with young historians from all over Europe
To mark the commemoration of the First World War, the Europe 14|14 festival is making Berlin the meeting place in May 2014 for young Europeans to look back – and think forward – together.
Within the framework of this project, Foreign Minister Steinmeier will be meeting 400 young historians from 40 European and North African countries on Friday, 9 May.
After the opening speech, Foreign Minister Steinmeier will take part in a panel discussion to debate the importance of the First World War both for the young people themselves and for national identities and the European peace project.
History Campus – Europe 14|14 is a European project organised by the Federal Agency for Civic Education, the Körber Foundation and the Robert Bosch Stiftung, as well as numerous other partners.
Twitter: @HistoryCampus, hashtag #e1414
However, the European Writers Conference on 8 May will be looking not only to the future, but also back to the first International Writers Conference, which took place in then West Berlin in May 1988 under the motto “A Dream of Europe”.
Some of the writers who took part in the debate on the vision of a peaceful, democratic Europe back in 1988 will be participating this year too.
Today, more than 25 years on, they will be asking whether the dream has become reality.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier will open the conference in the atrium of the Alfred Herrhausen Society.
The European dream in the global reality
Foreign Minister Steinmeier will open the conference with a keynote address on “The European dream in a global reality”.
Other speakers will include the philosopher Ágnes Heller and former Foreign Minister Joschka Fischer.
Preventing a new division of Europe
Speaking in the run-up to these events, Steinmeier said the European dream was not only dreamt by Europeans.
While it was true that in some places the fulfilment of this dream still faced obstacles, he went on, people all over the world cherished the dream of freedom, democracy and the rule of law.
Working for 65 years to promote the rule of law, human rights and democracy throughout Europe
Council of Europe turns 65
The Council of Europe founded on 5 May 1949 was the first of Europe’s major new post-war organisations.
The Federal Republic of Germany joined the Council of Europe initially as an associate member on 13 July 1950 and became a full member on 2 May 1951.
Its currently 47 members include every country in Europe except Belarus and Kosovo.
The aim of the Council of Europe is to achieve a greater unity between its members for the purpose of safeguarding and realising the ideals and principles which are their common heritage and facilitating their economic and social progress (Article 1 of the Statute of the Council of Europe).
An important part of this work is monitoring members countries' compliance with the obligations of membership.
the European Court of Human Rights.
The Committee of Ministers is the Council of Europe’s decision-making body and comprises the foreign ministers of all member countries, or their permanent diplomatic representatives in Strasbourg.
The PACE also elects e.g. the Secretary General from a list of nominees drawn up by the Committee of Ministers.
Its 318 seats are distributed among the national  delegations of the Council of Europe’s member countries.
Germany’s delegation is made up of 18 national parliamentarians and 18 substitutes.
The Congress of Local and Regional Authorities  (CLRA), which also has 318 seats, serves as the voice of the member countries’ regional and local politicians.
Its mission is to promote local and regional democracy and strengthen local self-government and transfrontier cooperation.
It also provides observers to monitor regional and local elections in member countries.
The European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) is considered the Council of Europe’s flagship with direct relevance to Europe's citizens.
The institutions of the Council of Europe are assisted by the Secretariat.
On assuming office, Secretary General Jagland introduced extensive reforms that are now bearing fruit. These include refocusing the Council of Europe on its core competences, i.e. protecting and promoting human rights, the rule of law and democracy throughout Europe.
Conventions of the Council of Europe
The Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities and the European Charter for Minority or Regional Languages are milestones in improving protection for minorities .
Partial agreements  are a special form of close thematic cooperation by some or all member countries.
The EU provides the Council of Europe with considerable funds to implement joint projects aimed at protecting and promoting human rights, the rule of law and democracy in Council of Europe member countries as well as in Europe’s southern and eastern neighbourhood.
The Treaty of Lisbon, which envisages the EU’s accession to the European Convention on Human Rights, offers new opportunities for even closer cooperation between the Council of Europe and the EU.
Press release on “Europe – Dream and Reality” (6 May 2014)
Foreign Minister Steinmeier comments on yesterday’s meeting between President Putin and the Swiss OSCE Chairperson-in-Office Burkhalter
Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement in Berlin today (8 May):
We have reached an important, perhaps even decisive, juncture.
We must now focus our efforts on making sure that the elections can be held on 25 May and on laying the basis for a new constitution as quickly as possible.
To this end, it is very important to establish a national dialogue that involves suitable representatives of eastern Ukraine.
What they agreed in Moscow must be put into practice immediately.
What is the future for the continent?
Immediately following the conference, the Deutsches Theater will open its doors for the Long Night of European Literature, a public reading of their texts and poems by writers from countries across Europe, including Portugal, Greece, Bosnia and Germany.
In particular, they will consider whether the European model can still serve as a reference point for other states despite global competition and the economic crisis.
The conference will broadcast on livestream by Deutsche Welle.
The situation in Ukraine is extremely critical, but there is still a chance that we can prevent a further escalation of violence and the total loss of control in eastern Ukraine by using diplomatic means.
I welcome the constructive tone that President Putin adopted after his meeting with OSCE Chairperson-in-Office Burkhalter.
We fully support the proposals that Didier Burkhalter discussed with President Putin yesterday and has now forwarded to the parties to the Geneva accord.
On 8 and 9 May Foreign Minister Steinmeier and 30 writers from across Europe will be meeting in Berlin to discuss new impulses for a peaceful, democratic Europe.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier with Nicol Ljubic, Antje Rávic Strubel and Mely Kiyak
A large group of European writers and intellectuals will be discussing these and many other questions in Berlin on 8 and 9 May.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier opened the conference in the atrium of the Alfred Herrhausen Society along with Mely Kiyak, Nicol Ljubic, Antje Rávic Strubel and Tilman Spengler, members of the initiative group.
In his speech, Steinmeier said the fact that the conference was taking place was something of a miracle.
And that was a good thing, he added:
What literature could expect from politics, the Minister said, was not a question he as a politician could answer – but ultimately art had to remain free: it must not be allowed to become a political instrument.
When it came to the point, Europe needed literature, affirmed the Minister.
On 9 May writers, philosophers, politicians and economists will join with members of the public to debate the importance of a “European model of civilisation”.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier continued:
The Court deals with complaints relating to breaches of the European Convention on Human Rights
The European Court of Human Rights, based in Strasbourg, deals with complaints relating to breaches of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR).
The ECHR is an international agreement under which the member states of the Council of Europe have undertaken to guarantee their citizens basic civil and political rights.
All member states of the Council of Europe are obliged to ratify the Convention.
The Court deals with complaints from individual applicants (against a Contracting Party of the Convention) and with complaints from Contracting Parties against each other.
The admissibility of an application depends on whether all domestic remedies have been exhausted.
A prerequisite in Germany is that the plaintiff must have appealed unsuccessfully to the Federal Constitutional Court against an infringement of his or her rights.
Hearings of the Court are public. Judgements are issued in the official languages of the Council of Europe (English and French).
If the Court finds there has been a violation of the ECHR, it can, according to Article 41 thereof, afford just satisfaction to the injured party.
The parties to a dispute are legally bound to accept the Court’s judgements and must take the necessary measures to implement them.
The Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe monitors the enforcement of the Court’s judgements.
If a judgement is not enforced, the Committee of Ministers normally issues so-called interim resolutions demanding that the recalcitrant state enforce the judgement in question.
Germany has always been a staunch supporter in the Committee of Ministers of the timely enforcement of Court judgements.
The obligation to enforce judgements handed down by the Court naturally also applies to Germany.
A total of six judgements were issued in cases involving Germany in 2013.
In three of these, the Court held that the ECHR had in fact been violated.
In the fight against the Ebola virus, the Federal Foreign Office is providing the funds to equip a national laboratory in Conakry in collaboration with the Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine (BNI).
The Federal Foreign Office is also supporting the activities of the European Commission laboratory currently helping diagnose cases of Ebola in Guéckédou, 700 km from Conakry.
The BNI is involved in that project too, alongside other European partners.
The BNI has been in action in West Africa since the outbreak of the Ebola crisis, in partnership with the World Health Organization (WHO).
It is receiving 110,000 euros in support as part of the German Partnership Program for Excellence in Biological and Health Security.
As a result, the number of cases pending fell by around 22 percent from 2012 to 2013.
To deal with the flood of applications received by the Court, and the potential difficulty in keeping up with the workload, vital reforms were launched in 2010. Important parts of these have already been implemented.
The presence of 30 writers from countries as diverse as Hungary, Sweden, Germany, Russia, Belarus, Turkey and the Republic of Moldova showed, the Minister said, that Europe’s cultural borders did not follow the same contours as its political borders.
“How much poorer literature would be, how much stupider politics, if their borders always had to coincide!”
The European Writers Conference, Steinmeier said, therefore tried to create a thrilling, exciting triangle between the three – literature, politics and Europe.
On the other hand, politics may expect literature to highlight cultural boundaries and differences, because, like literature, foreign policy is based on perception and understanding.
Professor Angelika Nußberger has served as the German judge at the Court since January 2011.
Some 96,050 cases were pending as of April 2014.
On a diplomatic mission in Kenya
Andreas Peschke toured round Kenya more than 20 years ago while still a student.
One big advantage is his knowledge of local languages: as well as English and Swahili, he speaks a few words of Maa, the language of the Masai.
Bild: Visit to Kakuma refugee camp
Dust, hot wind, 45 degrees centigrade: Kakuma refugee camp in Kenya’s northern semi-desert, near the border with South Sudan, is an inhospitable place.
Some 300 new refugees fleeing the civil war in the neighbouring country come to Kenya every day.
There are already 120,000 people living in this camp.
Germany is well represented in Kenya
Bild: Meeting with German development workers
Around 1000 Germans live in Kenya and 70,000 tourists visit the picturesque coast or the world-famous national parks every year.
So Germany is well represented in Kenya, East Africa’s economic and cultural hub.
The entire team at the Embassy, and I too, are kept busy doing whatever we can to help our fellow Germans during their stay in Kenya.
Europaforum at the Federal Foreign Office:
As representatives of the German Embassy, we not only work here with the Kenyan Government but are also in contact with journalists, business people, human rights activists and artists.
Furthermore, the German Embassy is implementing projects in the sphere of development cooperation:
Politicians from Germany and numerous other European countries participated in the discussion in the packed Weltsaal.
The ongoing Ukrainian crisis cast its shadow over the event.
Europaforum:
Second German-Italian Business Forum
Foreign Minister Steinmeier took part in the German-Italian Business Forum held in Rome today.
Truly European
Minister of State Roth opens the Europaforum
Steinmeier at German-Italian Business Forum in Rome
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier took part in the German-Italian Business Forum held in Rome today.
Next to the Forum, he also had a chance to talk to Foreign Minister Federica Mogherini about the situation in Ukraine.
The day was all about Europe for Foreign Minister Steinmeier.
The reason for his trip was the second German-Italian Business Forum being held in Rome, which is intended to help deepen bilateral economic relations.
A warm welcome from Foreign Minister Mogherini
Roth stressed that the EU “must not allow itself to be divided,
Anyone who speaks the language and shows an interest in their culture is always appreciated by Kenyans.
I toured Kenya in 1993 as a student.
I am here again – this time as the German Ambassador in Nairobi.
Italy’s Foreign Minister Mogherini welcoming her German counterpart to Rome
“The force of law prevails in Europe, not the law of force.”
Secondly, Roth believes that the social dimension should be given greater consideration in Europe, “since there is still much to be done on the path to a truly social Europe”.
And thirdly, he stressed that basic shared European values had to be protected:
The Kikuyu, another Kenyan people, have a saying:
Democracy, the rule of law, cultural and religious diversity, the protection of minorities and freedom of the press and opinion – these are all European trademarks.
Speech by Minister of State Michael Roth
Anyone who has tasted honey will return to the honey pot.
Discussions focus on Ukraine
That is what happened to me.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier at the Europaforum
Panellists in the discussions that followed included Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán and German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble.
Since September 2013, he has been the German Ambassador in Nairobi with responsibilities for a wide range of tasks such as supporting refugees from South Sudan or cultivating contacts with Kenyan artists.
I visited the camp in my capacity as German Ambassador in Kenya to gain a first-hand impression of the situation there, as well as to talk to refugees and humanitarian aid workers from all over the world.
Germany will continue to provide support for the refugees and the relief organisations.
Embassy helps supply drinking water
Together with Environment Minister Judi Wakhungu, I inaugurated ecological toilets in a Masai village school.
I first of all welcomed the warriors, elders and women present in English, Swahili and then in their native language Maa.
The atmosphere got better and better.
The debate revolved around various themes, such as the further development of the European Union, enlargement to the east and dealing with the debt crisis.
Anyone who has had a taste will want to return
The entire event was however overshadowed by the perilous situation in Ukraine.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier talked about Europe’s response to the crisis and Germany’s role in the world at the start of his discussion with Andreas Cichowicz and Ulrich Deppendorf.
This focused primarily on developments in the Ukrainian crisis over the past few days.
President Putin’s call to postpone the planned referendum in eastern Ukraine was “at least a glimmer of hope, which should be worked on,” according to the German Foreign Minister.
Steinmeier called first and foremost for continued efforts towards a political settlement,
while categorically rejecting a military response.
In Steinmeier’s words:
In the early afternoon, Foreign Minister Steinmeier was welcomed to Rome very warmly by his Italian opposite number, Federica Mogherini, and the President of the German-Italian Chamber of Commerce in Frankfurt am Main, Emmanuele Gatti.
In his speech to the German and Italian entrepreneurs and business representatives, Steinmeier emphasised the impossibility of a strong Europe without a strong Italy.
For example, EU Energy Commissioner Günther Oettinger talked in depth about the desired diversification of Europe’s energy supplies and becoming less dependent on gas imports from Russia.
German-Italian economic relations have traditionally been very close.
most of it invested in northern Italy.
Around 1600 German companies have a presence in Italy, while 1800 Italian businesses are operating in Germany.
The euro:
generating European unity
Europe’s territorial integrity shaken by Crimea
In the afternoon, Federal Chancellor Angela Merkel attended part of the Europaforum in the Federal Foreign Office.
She discussed “Perspectives on EU policy - more or less Europe” with ARD journalists Ulrich Deppendorf and Sonia Mikich.
However, even here the impact of the Ukrainian conflict dominated the debate.
In Merkel’s analysis, Putin’s latest utterances regarding Ukraine were a sign that “we can continue our talks”.
For more information visit the Europaforum website.
More information on the WDR Europaforum website.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier speaking at the German-Italian Business Forum
The German Foreign Minister also used his speech to underline the importance of the common currency to Europe’s economic and political development.
However, Merkel also left Moscow in no doubt that there would be consequences if attempts were made to frustrate the presidential elections on 25 May.
The Federal Chancellor emphasised that Ukraine must be able to determine its own future.
The West would “respect any decision freely made by the Ukrainians,” Merkel stated.
The euro, he said, generated unity,
bringing markets and people together.
calling the euro into question would set off a chain reaction which would eventually see European integration in its entirety called into question too.”
On the negative consequences of the European debt crisis, Steinmeier insisted that
“Europe is not the problem – but Europe needs to help solve the problem.”
A diplomatic solution for Ukraine
Both at the Business Forum and during Steinmeier’s talks with his Italian counterpart, the crisis in Ukraine was high on the agenda.
thereby jeopardising “the underpinnings of territorial integrity in Europe, which had been accepted as the basis for the co-existence of states.”
That has prompted UNHCR to raise the alarm and declare that Kakuma is overcrowded.
Merkel did not mince her words, saying explicitly that plain speaking was called for.
Moreover, there are a Goethe-Institut, a branch of the German Academic Exchange Service, around 100 German companies, more than 200 development workers and a German school.
The terrorist threat from neighbouring Somalia is causing problems for the country and for all of us.
I recently welcomed a German ship taking part in the EU Atalanta mission in the port of Mombasa which was to be deployed combating piracy in the waters off the coast of Kenya.
for example, Germany is helping to provide people in rural areas and in urban slums with safe drinking water.
What kind of Europe do we want?
The main issue considered by Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier in his conversation with Ulrich Deppendorf and Andreas Cichowicz was thus that of reaching a negotiated solution to the conflict.
The overall situation still permits a negotiated solution.
Teasertext: Andreas Peschke, German Ambassador in Nairobi, is working to help refugees from South Sudan and can greet the Masai in their native language.
The 17th WDR Europaforum was held in the Federal Foreign Office in Berlin on 8 May 2014. The central topic discussed was “What kind of Europe do we want?”
Eminent guests included
Many companies are worried about the effects which the latest escalation could have on the European economy.
“There can be no more playing for time,” he said,
The German Foreign Minister was planning to return straight to Berlin in the evening after his talks in Rome.
His very European day was to end with an appearance at the Long Night of European Literature.
Italy Country Profile
Dream and Reality
While there, he also had a chance to talk to Foreign Minister Mogherini about the situation in Ukraine.
After starting Thursday (8 May) by opening a External link, opens in new windowEuropean Writers’ Conference in Berlin and taking part in broadcaster WDR’s External link, opens in new windowEuropaforum at the Federal Foreign Office, he boarded a plane for a short visit to External link, opens in new windowItaly – one of Germany’s closest European partners.
He said he took his hat off to Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi for the determination with which he approached difficult decisions.
Germany is Italy’s most important trading partner by a long way.
Direct investment from Germany amounts to more than 30 billion euros,
Steinmeier emphasised the importance of a “diplomatic solution” to the crisis.
Turning to the outcomes of the Geneva meeting on Ukraine and the most recent talks which OSCE Chairperson-in-Office Didier Burkhalter has been holding in Moscow, the German Foreign Minister called on those involved to finally put what they agreed into practice.
as there was a risk that we would otherwise reach a point where the whole situation would spiral out of control.
In that context, Steinmeier welcomed Russian President Vladimir Putin’s call, following the most recent escalation of the conflict, to postpone the referendum which pro-Russian forces are planning in eastern Ukraine, describing it as “perhaps a small hopeful sign that diplomatic efforts to seek a political solution are still on the table.”
This question provided the framework for the 17th Europaforum debate between policy makers and leading journalists at the Federal Foreign Office.
This was the question at the heart of the 17th WDR Europaforum, which took place in the Federal Foreign Office on 8 May.
In his opening address, Minister of State for Europe Michael Roth called on the participants, including the many young people in attendance, to decide where they stood on the key issues – to decide what kind of Europe they want and how life in the EU should be in the future.
He picked out three areas that will be vital in the coming years if the “European success story” is to be continued.
He firstly specified the common foreign and security policy as important if Europe is to “send a clear message”, not least with respect to the ongoing conflict in Ukraine.
Thereafter, many of the eminent panellists raised issues relating to the Ukrainian crisis.
Former Polish President Aleksander Kwaśniewski also analysed the conflict with Russia from the perspective of the EU’s eastern enlargement and relations between individual EU member states and Russia.
Chancellor Merkel talks to U. Deppendorf and S. Mikich
She also stressed that the annexation of the Crimean peninsula 70 years after the end of World War II had put a question mark over Europe’s architecture,
Federal Chancellor Angela Merkel, European Commission President José Manuel Barroso, European Parliament President Martin Schulz, EU Commissioner Günther Oettinger, the former Polish President Aleksander Kwaśniewski, President Viktor Orbán of Hungary and German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble.
However," he continued,
I am convinced that
More than two million people have sought refuge from the violence in Syria in neighbouring countries, while double that number have fled their homes and are dependent on humanitarian aid within the country itself.
Germany is one of the biggest bilateral donors and has provided more than 440 million euros since the start of the Syria crisis, of which more than 350 million for humanitarian aid measures and some 130 million for recovery and rehabilitation as well as bilateral aid.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier opened the conference on both days.
However, the European Writers Conference on 8 May looked not only to the future, but also back to the first International Writers Conference, which took place in then West Berlin in May 1988 under the motto “A Dream of Europe”.
Some of the writers who took part in the debate on the vision of a peaceful, democratic Europe back in 1988 participated this year too.
Today, more than 25 years on, they were asking whether the dream had become reality.
Cultural and political borders
Steinmeier giving the opening speech
In his speech, Steinmeier said the fact that the writers conference was taking place was something of a miracle.
The presence of 30 writers from countries as diverse as Hungary, Sweden, Germany, Russia, Belarus and Turkey showed, the Minister said, that Europe’s cultural borders did not follow the same contours as its political borders.
A triangle of literature, politics and Europe
Foreign Minister Steinmeier with Hungarian author Ágnes Heller
On the other hand, he went on, politics may expect literature to highlight cultural boundaries and differences, because, like literature, foreign policy was based on perception and understanding.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier issued the following statement in Berlin today (10 May):
Germany is therefore providing a further 80 million euros in humanitarian aid for people from Syria.
EU eastward enlargement has enriched Europe
Europe needs literature as part of a vibrant civil society, after all, the Minister continued.
However, the ceasefire is fragile.
Speech by Foreign Minister Steinmeier (file photo)
The ceasefire, which was achieved thanks to the intelligent and persistent mediation efforts by Ethiopia and the African regional organisation IGAD, is a significant step towards finding a political solution to the conflict in South Sudan.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier congratulates Michael Georg Link on his appointment as ODIHR Director
On 9 May the Bundestag organised a debate entitled “Ten years of EU eastward enlargement”.
In his speech, Foreign Minister Steinmeier invited listeners to reflect on the historic and ground-breaking Europe speech given by the French Foreign Minister Robert Schuman.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier congratulates Michael Georg Link, former Minister of State at the Federal Foreign Office, on his appointment as new Director of the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR), which is based in Warsaw.
With its election observation missions, the ODIHR renders invaluable services to democracy.
EU eastern enlargement:
a success story
this eastward enlargement is a success story in many respects.
The full text of Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s speech is available here.
European house has weathered storms
Public celebration in Slubice in the night from 30 April to 1 May 2004
There are also major challenges to be overcome within the European Union.
On the other hand, there are also political challenges:
How can we make Europe more transparent and democratic?
The German Foreign Minister said that the question of cohesion within the EU “particularly during a phase of foreign policy challenges” was crucial.
Steinmeier spoke positively about the EU’s crisis management during the past four years.
It has weathered some severe storms, even though I have to say that
Cohesion in a community of solidarity
He stressed that on 1 May 2004 they had joined “a community of solidarity and not merely a group of fair-weather friends”.
Yet he added that this community also involved discussing critical issues with one another and tackling necessary reforms, for example in the area of the rule of law.
But he pointed out that in this case, too,
Michael Link assumes a position which is of great significance especially in view of the current crisis in Ukraine.
Its activities focus on election observation missions in all OSCE countries and on promoting democratic and rule-of-law standards in the OSCE area.
The ODIHR is also committed to fighting intolerance and discrimination.
More on this topic
Europe – Dream and Reality:
European Writers Conference, 8 – 9 May 2014
WDR Europaforum:
What kind of Europe do we want?, 8 May 2014
In the line of duty:
During a debate in the German Bundestag Federal Foreign Minister Steinmeier commemorates the significance of the EU eastward enlargement ten years ago.
After the opening speech, the authors present formed various panels to discuss different perspectives in relation to Europe.
He said that as a result the European Union had not only become larger, but had also gained considerably in terms of experience, history and political influence.
In the evening, the Deutsches Theater opened its doors for the Long Night of European Literature, a public reading of their texts and poems by writers from countries across Europe, including Portugal, the Netherlands and Albania.
Twenty-eight countries, twenty-four languages and more than 500 million people – that is the European Union today, summed up in a few statistics.
But it amounts to much more than that:
In his speech on Europe Day Federal Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier drew attention to the significance of the process of European integration – particularly at a time of serious crisis.
hopes of a life in freedom and peace
Steinmeier said that the 2004 round of enlargement, in which, alongside Cyprus and Malta, eight Central and Eastern European States became members of the European Union, had been particularly instrumental in overcoming the division of Europe.
The authors’ joint manifesto from the European Writers Conference is available here.
Combining freedom and social cohesion
On 9 May writers, philosophers, politicians and economists joined members of the public to debate the importance to reality of a “European dream”.
In particular, they considered whether the European model could still serve as a reference point for other states despite global competition and the economic crisis.
Steinmeier talking about the dream of Europe
Foreign Minister Steinmeier opened the conference with a keynote address on “The European dream in a global reality”.
Steinmeier went on to say that the experiences of the Central and Eastern European States in a social context as well as from an economic and political perspective were “an invaluable trove of experience for Europe” – particularly today in efforts “to facilitate elections in Ukraine” and to bring the country “back onto a stable track”.
Steinmeier said that this election year 2014 was bringing these “into particularly sharp focus”.
They include economic problems on the one hand, predominantly efforts to overcome the debt crisis and the “alarmingly high levels of youth unemployment”.
Returning to the current Ukraine conflict and the fears of Central and Eastern European States regarding Russia, the German Foreign Minister reassured the member states that the Union would stand together even in difficult times.
He began by emphasising that the European dream was the dream of a society that combined freedom and social cohesion.
This model was unique in the world, he said, based as it was neither on pure individualism nor on authoritarianism.
The European model embodies the hope for a balance, never taken for granted and constantly reinstated, between freedom and security.
Europe as a project for peace
The atrium of the Alfred Herrhausen Society
Today, when spirits we believed dead are re-emerging in Eastern Europe, Europe must be united at its heart.
He emphasised that the EU should not turn a blind eye if the independence of the judiciary or the freedom of the press was under threat in individual countries.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier: Ceasefire in South Sudan a sign of hope
“The news that a ceasefire has been agreed between the conflicting parties in South Sudan is an important first sign of hope for people in the conflict region.
What is important now is that the weapons really do fall silent, the parties agree on a long-term and stable ceasefire and people in need in the conflict regions of South Sudan can be provided with humanitarian assistance again without restrictions.
The political leaders of the two conflicting parties in South Sudan are responsible for ensuring that this can be achieved and that further talks take place to develop a viable strategy for a peaceful future for their country.
Germany, together with its partners in the EU, will continue to support the African mediation efforts in every way it can.”
At the end of his speech, Foreign Minister Steinmeier reached the unambiguous conclusion that,
looking back on Schuman’s speech of 64 years ago and the development and enlargement of the European Union, it was clear that the “creative efforts” had been worth all the hard work.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier recalled that the authors at the 1988 conference had written an open letter calling for the division of Europe to be surmounted.
Quite simply, if cultural and political boundaries were always to coincide, how much poorer would literature be!
He cited Kissinger as having said much the same thing:
“Foreign policy, Henry Kissinger said, begins with perception, with seeing the world through different eyes.”
The definitive European “narrative” that so many people were calling for, he said, seemed unlikely ever to be found.
Rather than seek a common identity, what he said Europe needed was to allow space for the diverse range of identities its encompassed; it needed tools, he explained, which would enable its many voices to act together.
The conference, the Foreign Minister averred, should therefore be not an isolated feature but part of a permanent conversation among authors.
How little they suspected, he said, that the division would be lifted so soon – and how little had the organisers of this year’s conference suspected twelve months ago that we would now be fearing a new division.
As the Foreign Minister put it, the Ukraine crisis was giving many people a fresh perspective on the Europe policy of recent years:
The core of Europe, namely peace and peacekeeping, has been taken too much for granted recently.
For many young Europeans, peace in Europe has for decades been as much a part of the furniture as easyJet and Erasmus programmes.
Nobody questioned it, and nobody could imagine that it would ever change.
But the Ukraine crisis demonstrates in dramatic fashion that the task Europe was founded for has not yet been fulfilled.
The full text of Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s speech is available here.
Keynote speech by Foreign Minister Steinmeier at the Alfred Herrhausen Society conference “Europe – Dream and Reality” (9 May 2014)
Manifesto of the 2014 European Writers Conference (8 May 2014)
Speech by Foreign Minister Steinmeier at the European Writers Conference (8 May 2014)
Address by Foreign Minister Steinmeier at the reception to open the European Writers Conference (7 May 2014)
Speech by Federal Foreign Minister Steinmeier during the debate entitled “Ten years of EU eastward enlargement” at the German Bundestag on 9 May 2014
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier stated on 15 January 2014 when announcing that Germany was to increase its humanitarian assistance by 80 million euros:
It is no coincidence that
During a debate in the Bundestag entitled “Ten years of EU eastward enlargement”, Foreign Minister Steinmeier reminded listeners that in 2004 Europe overcame the rift which had run through the continent and through millions of family histories.
That also applies to the candidate countries, which can count on our solidarity.
Treaty of Accession of 2004:
Speech by Foreign Minister Steinmeier on “Ten years of EU eastward enlargement”
Treaty of Accession of 2004
Last updated on 18 February 2014
The fact that this important OSCE institution is now headed by the former Minister of State at the Federal Foreign Office, who is an experienced German foreign policy specialist, emphasises Germany's special commitment to building up democracy and the rule of law in Europe.
We can see this especially at the moment in Ukraine, where long-term election observers are already active with a skilled eye and an independent mind.
On 1 July former Minister of State Michael Georg Link will assume the position of ODIHR Director for an initial term of three years.
With 135 staff members and an annual budget of approximately 15 million euros, the ODIHR is one of the most important OSCE institutions in the human rights domain.
Federal Foreign Office Spokesperson Martin Schäfer issued the following statement today (9 May) at the Federal Press Conference:
64 years ago to the day the French Foreign Minister Robert Schuman delivered a ground-breaking speech on the integration of European interests, a speech on the vision of a united Europe.
Nevertheless, dear colleagues, however much or little hope the people at that time had,
Schuman’s hopes for Europe have been good for us.
Today, when we look back, we can see that
On 8 and 9 May Foreign Minister Steinmeier and 30 European writers met in Berlin to discuss fresh ideas for a peaceful, democratic Europe.
A large group of European writers and intellectuals discussed these and many other questions in Berlin on 8 and 9 May.
Through its contributions towards international and cross-sectoral aid projects run by the International Committee of the Red Cross, the United Nations and German NGOs, the Federal Foreign Office has been providing humanitarian assistance in Syria and neighbouring countries since the start of the crisis.
Less than 30 years after Schuman’s speech we saw these hopes flare once again: in the eyes of the peaceful revolutionaries on Prague’s Wenceslas Square and in the Gdansk shipyards.
Europe and the Europeans seized this historic opportunity together.
Ten years ago today, on 1 May 2004, Europe overcame the rift that for decades had run not only through the continent but also through millions of family histories.
After two world wars and decades of division and distrust, should we have still reckoned with this?
Spotlight on Egypt Teasertext: More than three years after Hosni Mubarak was removed from office, Egypt still faces enormous challenges.
Bild: A young man flying the Egyptian flag (file photo)
A transformation partnership was agreed with Egypt – a country key to the Arab world – in August 2011.
The aim is to support the setting up of democratic institutions and foster the rule of law and human rights.
Other key features of the partnership are promotion of civil society and an intensified cultural dialogue.
It is important to remember this, particularly in these times.
More information on the Tahrir Lounge project is available here .
With regard to the achievements of those who made European reunification possible, I would like to say at this point that
The Muslim Brotherhood was banned and classified as a terrorist organisation.
Presidential elections are to take place in late May 2014.
in view of the courage demonstrated by these forerunners we cannot allow ourselves to fall prey to resignation in the current situation.
The former Defence Minister al-Sisi is considered to have the best chance of winning.
We could cite a whole range of numbers and statistics to support this view.
Back then, you will remember, it was less than half of the EU average.
Spotlight on Tunisia
Teaser: Germany and Tunisia have agreed to cooperate closely in order to jointly advance democratic transformation in the country following the collapse of the Ben Ali regime.
Just a few days later – on 26 January – the Constituent Assembly voted by an overwhelming majority in favour of a new constitution.
The country has thus achieved key milestones following a long crisis triggered by two political assassinations.
The transition to pluralistic democracy and stable rule of law must, however, be accompanied by an ongoing improvement in the social and economic conditions under which the Tunisian people live.
I could tell you about Latvia, which only recently introduced the euro at the beginning of this year and is now the leader in Europe with 4 per cent economic growth.
More on German-Tunisian intergovernmental consultations
For 2012/2013, the German Government provided an additional 100 million euros from the Federal Foreign Office budget to support the process of transformation in North Africa.
Moreover, in 2012 the German Government approved the conversion of Tunisian debts, releasing up to 60 million euros for jointly agreed projects and reforms.
A special French-language website on the transformation partnership with Tunisia has been online since 8 February 2013.
It provides information on the diversity of the German-Tunisian projects launched.
The German Government is carrying out these projects in cooperation with partners such as the German political foundations, the Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ), the KfW development bank, the German-Tunisian Chamber of Industry and Commerce, Deutsche Welle, Media in Cooperation and Transition (MICT), the Max Planck Institute and the German Foundation for International Legal Cooperation (IRZ).
But of course, it is not just about statistics.
In mid-April, the electoral law so crucial for the parliamentary and presidential elections scheduled for 2014 was adopted.
At the moment this election year 2014 is bringing the major problems facing the European Union into particularly sharp focus.
How can we get Europe’s economy growing again?
How should we tackle the alarmingly high levels of youth unemployment?
How can we make Europe more democratic and transparent?
This European house stands firm, and it is firmer than many believed.
this European house will remain a building site for the foreseeable future.
After all, on 1 May 2004 they joined a community of solidarity and not merely a group of fair-weather friends.
If the independence of the judiciary or the freedom of the press is under threat in individual countries, or if efforts to fight corruption are not sufficient in our view, we cannot simply look the other way.
That’s one point.
But even more alarming is that
Let us put it another way:
What state would this Europe be in today if we had not stood together in the economic crisis?
However, we can say that
Twenty-eight member states, twenty-four languages in Europe, 500 million people:
But to return to Schuman:
peace in the world and in Europe cannot be preserved without creative efforts which correspond to the size of the threat.
I think we all sense that we must now make huge efforts to preserve peace and prevent a new rift in Europe.
If we take the time to do this and look back on this anniversary of Schuman’s speech, we will all realise that
A Fresh Look at German Foreign Policy
Let us hear what you have to say – about Germany’s role in today’s world, about the importance, aims and tools of our foreign policy, about the extent of our responsibility and the limits of our capabilities.
Let us hear what you have to say – about Germany’s role in today’s world, about the importance, aims and tools of our foreign policy, about the extent of our responsibility and the limits of our capabilities.
Why “A Fresh Look at German Foreign Policy”?
Let us hear what you have to say!
And you have the chance to have your say,
Under the heading “The view from outside” on this website, you will find articles by renowned experts from Germany and abroad evaluating Germany’s foreign policy. All the articles are frank, and some of them are critical.
New website www.review2014.de
What values do we stand for?
What interests do we represent?
On the website, academics and experts from Germany and abroad present their views and ideas about German foreign policy, providing their individual answers to the questions asked above.
Steinmeier: Referendum is illegal
Yesterday’s referendum is illegal.
National dialogue in the form of round tables
The relevant hashtag is #Review2014.
Have a look and have your say!
Visite our new website – A Fresh Look at German Foreign Policy.
These are the questions “Review 2014 – A Fresh Look at German Foreign Policy” aims to explore in a frank debate.
About Germany’s role in today’s world, about the importance, aims and tools of our foreign policy, about the extent of our responsibility and the limits of our capabilities.
by leaving comments on the experts’ articles or on blog entries, by taking part in the debate on Twitter or by attending one of the discussions.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier visits Ukraine for talks
Extension of the sanctions
Other issues: Middle East peace process and the Neighbourhood Policy
On Tuesday (13 May) Federal Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier is travelling again to Ukraine.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier is meeting the Ukrainian leadership for talks again, primarily to support the efforts of the OSCE to defuse the situation and initiate a national dialogue.
The focus will be on supporting the efforts of the OSCE to initiate a national dialogue and defuse the overall situation.
In the evening the Foreign Minister will travel to Paris, where on Wednesday he will participate in a cabinet meeting with his French counterpart, Laurent Fabius.
Council conclusions on developing a European Union policy towards the Arctic region (PDF, 92 KB)
Kyiv, Ukraine
Diplomatic efforts to defuse the situation continue.
Experts from Germany include Volker Perthes, the director of the Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik – German Institute for International and Security Affairs (SWP), and historian Michael Wolffsohn.
There he will meet Interim President Oleksandr Turchynov as well as Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk and Foreign Minister Andriy Deshchytsia.
These questions are being discussed on the new website www.review2014.de, which has been online since 12 May.
The website forms part of the project “Review 2014 – A Fresh Look at German Foreign Policy” initiated by Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier and will provide a platform for debate on a foreign policy for the future.
Among the international contributors are former UN Secretary General Kofi Annan and UK writer Timothy Garton Ash, whose article will go online in the next few days.
www.review2014.de is a place for  online debate, news about upcoming events related to “Review 2014 – A Fresh Look at German Foreign Policy”, videos, blog posts and much more.
You can also debate the hows, whys and wherefores of German foreign policy on Twitter under @Review2014.
The day after the illegal referenda on the secession of Donetsk and Lugansk, the situation in Ukraine was the focus of the meeting in Brussels.
He said that in view of the perilous situation in the Eastern European country the aim was to support steps to establish a national dialogue.
Other issues discussed at the Foreign Affairs Council were the Middle East peace process and the European Neighbourhood Policy.
Germany and Tunisia therefore extended their close cooperation in September 2012 within the framework of the transformation partnership.
The German Government offered Germany’s assistance for the transition to democracy very soon after the fall of President Ben Ali on 12 February 2011.
More than half of it benefited Tunisia.
Round table with German involvement
Anyone who saw the images this evening and the alleged results, will know that this cannot, and indeed should not, be taken seriously, at least not by us.
But that should not deter us from continuing our efforts.
At his press conference, Steinmeier said he hoped the initiative for a round table in Ukraine would calm the crisis in Ukraine.
“The crucial question now is whether it is possible to kick off this process in the next few days”, said the Foreign Minister and added that the atmosphere in Ukraine could then change again.
In this context the OSCE announced on Monday (12 May) that a round table co-chaired by former German Ambassador Wolfgang Ischinger is to commence work on Wednesday.
The Federal Government welcomed the appointment of Ischinger, an experienced diplomat who is currently Chairman of the Munich Security Conference.
He went on to say that the readiness of both the Government in Kyiv and representatives from eastern Ukraine was equally vital if a national dialogue was to be established.
The Foreign Ministers of the European member states also met on Monday to discuss the situation in Ukraine.
They said the goal must be to defuse the situation.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier stressed that time was running out.
More information on the EU Foreign Ministers meeting on 12 May
Attending the French cabinet meeting
Arrival of the two Foreign Ministers after landing in Tunisia (24 April)
Furthermore, Steinmeier expressly welcomed the appointment of Wolfgang Ischinger to act as mediator between the parties to the conflict.
Wolfgang Ischinger is not only a good choice but also a top German diplomat with a wide range of experience.
He conducted the difficult talks about the future of Kosovo on our behalf.
He thus has experience with difficult situations where the differences appear to be almost irreconcilable.
What is more, Wolfgang Ischinger has built up extensive relations with all relevant partners in the last years as Chairman of the Munich Security Conference.
I believe that will be useful.
Furthermore, the assets of two companies said to have profited from the annexation of Crimea were frozen.
Steinmeier stated that further-reaching sanctions against Russia would have to be discussed if the presidential elections scheduled for 25 May are disrupted or stopped.
There Steinmeier will also report on his talks in Ukraine.
Steinmeier announced that he intended to travel to Kyiv as well as eastern or southern Ukraine tomorrow (13 May) to try and build bridges between the various camps.
He will deliver the speech honouring this year’s prizewinner, former French Prime Minister Jean-Marc Ayrault.
This plan is intended to end the violence, disarm illegal groups and initiate a national dialogue in the form of round tables. The first round table of this kind is due to take place this Wednesday (14 May).
With regard to the participation of separatist forces, Steinmeier reaffirmed his belief that “those who have blood on their hands do not usually take part in a round table”.
Article by Foreign Minister Steinmeier:
Giving up is not an option! published in the FAZ on 6 May
and  Tunisia:
Germany and France working side by side for Europe, 21 January
One of his tasks in Kyiv will be to meet the Ukrainian leadership for talks.
If the situation allows, Steinmeier will also visit the east of the country for talks.
The dangerous developments in Ukraine will be the focus of all meetings.
The German Foreign Minister continues to appeal for the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) to be given a more prominent role in Ukraine.
They expressed their hope that the presidential elections would take place as planned on 25 May.
We have to practise these basic values ourselves, without reservation, to ensure that our demands that others adopt them are credible.
Welcome to Potsdam!
I’m delighted that so many of you have come.
As a German.
And as a committed European.
As a Brandenburger who grew up not far from the Polish border.
Allow me to extend a warm welcome to you.
You understand Poland and you understand Germany!
Of course, I would like to extend a special welcome to all the journalists who have been nominated for the Tadeusz Mazowiecki Prize as well as former prizewinners.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier is travelling to Kyiv again to talk with the Ukrainian leadership.
“We must try to bring about the rejection of violence and separatism within the next two weeks.”
On Tuesday evening Foreign Minister Steinmeier will fly on to Paris, where
on Wednesday he will participate in a cabinet meeting with his French counterpart, Fabius.
In addition, the two Foreign Ministers will give an account of their trip to Moldova, Georgia and Tunisia (23 – 25 April).
The joint participation in the French cabinet meeting derives from an initiative launched by the two Foreign Ministers in January 2014 which was adopted at the Franco-German Council of Ministers on 10 February.
There could be no better inspiration.
I am particularly delighted that his son, Wojciech Mazowiecki, is here with us today.
Something that began as an experiment has become a success story.
In a few weeks the elections for the European Parliament will take place.
The future of Europe is also the theme of this year’s German-Polish media conference.
I don’t need to tell you here today that
Alongside a respected Ukrainian figure, the former German diplomat Wolfgang Ischinger is to take part as the OSCE representative and act as co-chair.
EU Foreign Ministers discuss Ukraine The day after the illegal referenda on the secession of Donetsk and Lugansk, the situation in Ukraine was the focus of the meeting in Brussels.
EU Foreign Ministers discuss Ukraine
The 28 EU Foreign Ministers adopted new sanctions against Russia.
At the start of the Foreign Affairs Council in Brussels, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier reaffirmed that everything must be done in the current situation to defuse the crisis.
He stated that, to this end, it was necessary to grant the OSCE a more prominent role in order to foster a national dialogue in Ukraine.
He said it would be exceptionally difficult in the current situation but that it was the only way to bring about de-escalation.
Referring to yesterday’s referendum by pro-Russian activists on the secession of Donetsk and Lugansk regions in eastern Ukraine, the German Foreign Minister went on to say:
Didier Burkhalter, the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office and Swiss President, presented a road map on the de-escalation of the crisis in Ukraine to the EU Foreign Ministers.
The EU Foreign Ministers also tightened the existing sanctions against Russia.
In reaction to the secession and annexation of Crimea, visa bans and asset freezes in the EU were imposed on another 13 prominent figures.
Visa bans were already in place for 48 Ukrainians and Russians.
The further development of the European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) and the Middle East peace process were also discussed at the Foreign Affairs Council.
In the light of the stalled mediation efforts by the US, the EU Foreign Ministers discussed ways of continuing the talks between Israel and the Palestinian Authority.
Moreover, they adopted Council conclusions on the EU policy on the Arctic region, the establishment of a human rights dialogue between the EU and Myanmar as well as the Comprehensive Approach, which is intended to ensure a more coherent EU foreign policy.
Council conclusions on the establishment of a human rights dialogue between the EU and Myanmar (PDF, 101 KB)
Council conclusions on the EU’s Comprehensive Approach (PDF, 101 KB)
For more information:
a Europe with capability to act is more important today than ever before!
In the anniversary year of 2014 we can look back on a chequered European and German-Polish history.
We remember the tragic moments of our history:
But we also remember the happy moments:
Twenty-five years ago peaceful revolutions transformed this part of Europe.
The citizens of the GDR were encouraged by this example.
And I would like to take this opportunity to mention another happy event:
Ten years ago Poland, along with other Central and Eastern European countries, joined the European Union.
I have considerable respect for the fact that, despite all the hurdles, the Poles never lost sight of their ultimate goal of Europe.
Other eastern regions embarked on a different path in 1989.
At the moment we are all watching Ukraine with concern.
We can all only hope that further military escalation, which would lead to a rift between East and West, can be avoided.
without threats from outside, yet with the solidarity and support of its European neighbours.
At this point allow me to address a personal appeal to the journalists.
Time and again the German media talk about Ukraine without letting the Ukrainians speak for themselves.
It is right and important that you do so.
I wish you all a good German-Polish evening!
What is important to me?
In the Berliner Zeitung recently Ulrich Krökel posed the question:
“Why are there hardly any Poland apologists in Germany?”
Let me answer that.
Firstly, the fact that a lively debate is finally emerging in Germany and Europe on the future of Eastern Europe should be welcomed.
We don’t have to agree with all the opinions being voiced.
However, in connection with the specific policy of the Federal Government, I want to make one thing clear.
German foreign policy is closely coordinated with all European partners.
And especially with Poland.
I can’t remember a time when diplomatic relations between Berlin and Warsaw were so close.
And as regards the “Poland apologists” Ulrich Krökel is looking for:
I am delighted that you all accepted our invitation to come to Potsdam!
I am very grateful for the opportunity I have as Poland Coordinator for the Federal Government to help shape German-Polish relations.
I regard this as a personal obligation which I take very seriously.
This accession was a huge catalyst for relations between Germany and Poland.
They work as doctors, carers, nursery teachers and tradespeople.
they are welcome in our country!
Poland is the number one trading partner for enterprises in Brandenburg.
To put it another way,
“grassroots” integration.
Of course, I am especially happy about that.
Close cooperation with Poland has become a natural part of day-to-day life for us as residents of Brandenburg.
Our relations are wide-ranging and cover almost all areas, beginning at an early age.
In Frankfurt, for example, there is a nursery for children from both sides of the border, and soon a German-Polish nursery is to open in Słubice.
Interaction with neighbours is a part of normal life for those who live in the border region.
At this point I would like to state specifically that Germans and Poles are already pulling together in the area of security,
Yet German-Polish history demonstrates how little we can take such cross-border normality for granted.
The border used to represent paralysis, now it is one of Europe’s main arteries.
That brings me back to the journalism prize.
whether within the EU or through our contacts with states such as Ukraine.
Working on specific solutions is also important to me.
I have already mentioned the German-Polish Youth Office.
I am also thinking of the International Youth Meeting Centre in Auschwitz.
The German Poland Institute in Darmstadt also deserves our attention.
We now have well-developed motorways and an increasingly dense network of regional train connections, such as the one between Berlin and Gorzów.
There remains plenty to do in this area.
Cooperation in the field of academia is a particular concern of mine.
And of course I will work to ensure that the European University Viadrina remains a key pillar of academic cooperation.
And I would like to encourage you to make use of the opportunities offered by the media conference in Potsdam.
We are proud that this year the German-Polish Prize for Journalism has for the first time been named after the great Polish politician Mazowiecki.
The response to today’s event, and indeed to the media conference as a whole, shows the high level of interest in German-Polish issues at the moment.
You, ladies and gentlemen, are playing a unique role in promoting understanding between Germans and Poles:
You are shaping German-Polish and therefore also European public opinion.
Steinmeier and Fabius in Paris:
German guest at French cabinet meeting
After his talks on Tuesday (13 May) in Ukraine, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier travelled on to Paris, where he will attend a cabinet meeting together with his French counterpart, Laurent Fabius, on Wednesday.
Right now we are experiencing how important this kind of public opinion is.
This is not just a conclusion drawn from looking at the past.
Newly arrived in Tunisia:
The two Foreign Ministers (24 April)
it was the Poles who showed us in 1989 that revolutionary change is possible without revolutionary violence.
And we East Germans should remember that
The round table in Warsaw – the original of which, incidentally, I recently saw for myself – heralded the revolution not only in Poland but in the entire Eastern Bloc.
Poland deserves the thanks of all Germans for this achievement!
Foreign Minister Steinmeier arrived in Paris on Tuesday evening.
When we see the events unfolding in Ukraine today, we can understand the tenacity shown by the Poles.
As part of the European Union Poland is not only able to rely on the solidarity of the other EU countries, but can also have its say in shaping the destiny of Europe.
In what will be a first, he will on Wednesday
It has to be said, particularly when we think back to 1989, that just like Germany and Poland then, Ukraine must now have the chance to freely choose the path it wishes to adopt.
By the same token, I read a lot in the Polish press about how the German population and policymakers have no sympathy for Poland’s current concerns about escalation in the East.
The German Foreign Minister will report on his talks in Ukraine.
Specific steps to strengthen cooperation
These German-Polish ties are influential in Europe.
I’m not advocating that we be totally uncritical towards one another.
My concern is that we don’t denigrate this common ground.
Instead we should nurture it in the interests of Europe!
The close ties between Poland and Germany are also reflected in the economy and trade.
He will deliver the speech honouring this year’s prizewinner, former French Prime Minister Jean-Marc Ayrault, at the event in the German Ambassador’s residence.
The development of the Polish economy has been very dynamic since the country joined the EU.
For more information, visit the Carlo Schmid Foundation website (in German).
Yet, however closely connected the economies may be, there is one thing that cannot be replaced:
exchange and interaction among citizens.
After his talks in Ukraine, Foreign Minister Steinmeier flew to Paris. On Wednesday, he and his counterpart Laurent Fabius are to brief the French cabinet on the situation in Ukraine.
Incidentally, Brandenburg provides the largest number of participants.
After all, it all hinges on young people.
The future of Europe is theirs!
Today you could say I’m wearing two hats – as Poland Coordinator for the Federal Government and Minister-President of Brandenburg.
Yet the border region is also a microcosm.
That means that common challenges are brought into particularly sharp focus, for example in the area of security.
In one week, on 15 May, I will attend the signing of the new German-Polish police agreement by the two interior ministers.
In the Land government of Brandenburg we have worked for many years to achieve this.
The new agreement will simplify cooperation in this area considerably.
whether with flood protection, rescue services or in police and customs work.
Here, one-sided thinking was abandoned a long time ago.
In the border region particularly it is important that citizens are mindful of these benefits.
For it is a personal desire of ours in the Land government to recognise this form of journalistic work, which often has its own specific challenges.
Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to return once more to my role as Poland Coordinator for the Federal Government and to take the opportunity to formulate a few goals and priorities.
I believe it is important that the network of German-Polish cooperation holds firm even in difficult times.
This constellation of foundations, institutes, initiatives and associations is what makes our relations strong enough to withstand crises.
I believe in good, trust-based cooperation which also benefits others,
Here, too, our foreign ministers, together with their French counterpart, have recently shown us a fine example of successful cooperation.
We want to continue to nurture and use the Weimar Triangle, as the Federal Government set down in its coalition agreement.
The Stiftung Genshagen in particular can play a key role in this area.
For some time now it has adopted a trilateral approach as opposed to a merely Franco-German outlook.
Professor Süssmuth, to whom I would like to extend a warm welcome here today, is active in this sphere.
The German-Polish institutions focusing on youth, language and science are particularly close to my heart.
In the coalition agreement the Federal Government has committed itself to improving the allocation of funds still further.
My first visit to the Polish Foreign Ministry convinced me that Poland shares a similar view.
Following talks with those in charge, including Foundation Council Chairman Dietmar Nietan, whom I would like to welcome here today, I am confident that we will succeed in establishing a sound basis for funding.
It is a cornerstone for dialogue between our two countries.
The German Länder and the Federal Foreign Office are working to secure a lasting, reliable financial basis for these important institutions.
These include the need to further extend cross-border transport infrastructure.
Nonetheless, the key routes between Berlin and Szczecin and Wrocław are literally still building sites.
Greater use of shared resources could create new opportunities.
Get to know one another and link up with one another.
I can only encourage you to maintain this commitment.
by providing both the big picture and the small details.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier visits Ukraine
Foreign Minister Steinmeier has met the Ukrainian leadership once again for talks, primarily to support the efforts of the OSCE to defuse the situation and initiate a national dialogue.
Steinmeier and Ukrainian Foreign Minister Deshchytsia
Federal Foreign Minister Steinmeier has travelled to Ukraine once again.
Following his meeting with Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk and Foreign Minister Andriy Deshchytsia, he stressed the crucial significance of the planned presidential elections on 25 May and expressed his hope that all eligible citizens would be able to cast their vote.
He said that the situation particularly in Eastern Ukraine remained perilous
and went on to express his respect for the efforts of the interim government.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier has travelled to Kyiv again to talk with the Ukrainian leadership.
Upon his arrival Steinmeier met Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk and Foreign Minister Andriy Deshchytsia at the airport.
Meeting with Ukrainian leadership and OSCE
"There is no alternative to Europe" 1 May 2004 saw the greatest enlargement in the history of the EU.
Our colleague Eckart Cuntz shares his memories as part of our series "In the line of duty".
“There is no alternative to Europe”
1 May 2004 saw the greatest enlargement in the history of the European Union.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier meets the head of the ODIHR election observation mission, Tana de Zulueta, and the head of the OSCE Monitoring Mission, Ertogrul Apakan
In the morning Steinmeier also held talks with the head of the ODIHR election observation mission, Tana de Zulueta, and the head of the OSCE monitoring mission, Ertogrul Apakan.
He then met Interim President Oleksandr Turchynov.
All meetings focused on the dangerous developments in Ukraine.
During his visit to Kyiv the German Foreign Minister continued to appeal for the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) to be given a more prominent role in Ukraine.
In one fell swoop, the number of member states jumped from 15 to 25.
Our colleague Eckart Cuntz was involved in the work on the enlargement process and shares his memories for our series “In the line of duty”.
The two Foreign Ministers will report on the situation in Ukraine and other matters.
attend a French cabinet meeting, alongside his French counterpart, Foreign Minister Fabius.
Steinmeier and Fabius will also brief the cabinet on their joint trip to Moldova, Georgia and Tunisia from 23 to 25 April.
Jean-Marc Ayrault to receive Carlo Schmid Prize
Eiffel Tower, Paris
Afterwards Foreign Minister Steinmeier will attend the award ceremony for the Carlo Schmid Prize in Paris.
“When you have been there for the entire progression from the fall of the Wall to that point then naturally it was a moment of great joy”, says Eckart Cuntz, remembering the night of 1 May 2004.
Back then, as Head of the European Directorate-General at the Federal Foreign Office, he was with former Foreign Minister Joschka Fischer at the festivities on the German-Polish border – fireworks, crowds of people, lots of cheering.
Nevertheless, for him the story had already begun years ago, when he was working on the prospect of EU eastward enlargement as a German diplomat.
The radical change of 1989 kick-starts the process
“Ultimately, it all began for me in 1987 when I arrived at the Permanent Representation in Brussels”, recounts Cuntz.
By then the matter had already come up in discussion:
“What do we – back then the European Economic Community – do with the countries of Central and Eastern Europe?”
And alongside this, Glasnost and Perestroika were implemented and the year 1989 arrived.
After the fall of the Wall this was naturally top of the agenda in Brussels.
What happens if the prospect of a united Germany is raised?
What happens if prospects are also raised for all of the other Central and Eastern European states which have experienced this democratic revolution?
Well at the beginning we were somewhat at a loss.
The European Council of December 1989 was the first meeting of the EEC Heads of State and Government at which the future of Germany and the other countries undergoing radical change was discussed.
German reunification under Europe’s roof
It was so overwhelming, some member states were hesitant and certainly were not shouting “hooray” from the very beginning.
Certain others, like Spanish Prime Minister González, strongly supported it from the outset – and we Germans were always grateful to him for doing so.
No alternative to Eastward enlargement
Community of shared values in Europe
“I have vivid memories of a Polish counsellor who later became Polish Permanent Representative. He came to me nearly every two days to say 'we also want something to be developed for us'.”
In the EU Commission people soon started thinking about it, remembers Ambassador Cuntz.
“What kind of an agreement would be conceivable to create closer connections between the European Union and the Central and Eastern European states which had undergone this radical change?”
However, the arrangement designed by the European Economic Area – according to Cuntz akin to a waiting room – was not enough for the Central and Eastern European states.
“No, of course it was not enough for these countries, they wanted to head towards entry.”
All in one fell swoop?
Ambassador Cuntz remembers what was discussed back then:
“Of course the perception – including amongst many in Germany – was that we cannot admit all the new democracies in one go, they are not at all ready. Maybe we could first admit three or four. How do you do that? These issues were discussed in the capitals and in Brussels”.
Ambassador Eckart Cuntz
The focus was above all on the consequences for the existing community, according to Cuntz: “Can we progress so quickly, will we not overstretch ourselves? Are the countries which want to join ready for enlargement, but also is the EU stable and prepared enough for it? These were the questions which were asked time and again and which are being asked again today.”
Transitional periods, for example for the freedom of movement for workers, were able to alleviate the concerns of many sceptics, reports Cuntz.
“However the goal was always clear – unfettered free movement of persons.”
10 cross the finishing line
Eckart Cuntz was chef de cabinet of the Secretary General of the Council of the European Union in Brussels from 1994 to 1999.
He was also there when Austria, Sweden and Finland joined in 1995.
This also provided new impetus for eastward enlargement:
The EU’s borders move East
You asked yourself:
we have now admitted neutral states like Finland or Sweden.
What political obstacles stand in the way of also admitting the Central and Eastern European states?
The key preparations for eastward enlargement took place at the European Council in Luxembourg in 1997, he continues.
The plan was for the accessions to follow the “regatta principle”:
whoever fulfils all the accession criteria fastest joins the EU first.
Contrary to our hopes however, at that time it was not possible to resolve the Cyprus issue.
In a referendum, the south voted against reunification according to the Annan Plan, whilst the north voted in favour.
“This led to the part of the country which had voted in favour remaining out whilst the other, which had rejected unification, joined the EU,” says Cuntz.
Today we still have a divided Cyprus, even if theoretically the whole country is a member of the EU.
Nonetheless I have not given up hope yet.
Ramifications of eastward enlargement today
The world of today is of course a completely changed place, and in the good sense, as now there is no mistrust towards all of the EU’s Central and Eastern European states.
The sovereign debt crisis had caused enthusiasm for Europe to fall significantly, but as Cuntz’s says:
“Nonetheless I think that most people – especially in Germany – know that there is no alternative to Europe.”
He said that in view of the perilous situation in the Eastern European country the aim was to support steps to establish a national dialogue.
Legitimacy through elections on 25 May
The situation in Eastern Ukraine in particular remains dangerous and threatening.
We therefore owe you, Prime Minister, all the more respect for the work you and your cabinet are performing in these difficult circumstances.
National dialogue and Ukrainian ownership
With regard to the idea of a national dialogue expounded by the OSCE, Steinmeier went on to say:
OSCE flag
The OSCE announced on Monday (12 May) that a round table co-chaired by former German Ambassador Wolfgang Ischinger was to commence work as soon as possible.
Speaking in Kyiv, Foreign Minister Steinmeier reiterated his hope that the state’s monopoly on the use of force could be restored by such measures.
Yatsenyuk thanked the Foreign Minister for Germany’s involvement in setting up the OSCE mission.
He also stressed how much the participation of German diplomat Wolfgang Ischinger as a mediator in the conflict was appreciated.
He said that the Ukrainian side would nominate its representatives for the round table as soon as possible.
The round table is expected to start work on Wednesday.
Afterwards Prime Minister Yatsenyuk and Ukrainian Foreign Minister Deshchytsia travelled to Brussels to discuss future support for Ukraine by the EU.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier said that he had also spoken to his two partners about ways in which Germany could help in the future.
Visit to Odessa:
Situation in Southern Ukraine
Foreign Minister Steinmeier with Ihor Palytsia, Governor of Odessa
He said that if the spiral of violence were not stopped, there may come a moment when unchecked violence would have free reinExterner Link, öffnet in neuem Fenster(Statement on tragic fire in Odessa, 3 May 2014).
Immediately after his arrival the German Foreign Minister expressed his condolences to Ihor Palytsia, who was appointed Governor of Odessa only four days ago.
I would therefore like to take the opportunity of our meeting to assure you of my sympathy.
Or, as the Governor explained,
He explained that he had started to bring the conflict parties together and stressed that all those who were not promoting violence and who wanted to participate could do so.
Short walk through Odessa
During his visit to Odessa Foreign Minister Steinmeier also met representatives of civil society and rectors of various higher education institutions in the city.
They also referred to the outbreaks of violence in the past week.
They emphasised that the focus of all their efforts was to return to this state.
Kyiv, Donetsk, Odessa:
The German Foreign Minister was able to glean an impression of this quite different side to the city and the situation in the south of the country both in his talks and during a walk through the city.
Steinmeier walked through the centre of the Black Sea port from the so-called Potemkin Steps, past the city hall and the German Honorary Consulate, to the opera house.
Addressing the press in Odessa
Afterwards, Foreign Minister Steinmeier gave his assessment of his visit to the Eastern European country.
It was his third visit to Ukraine in the last three months.
no standardised picture
He stressed that his visits to different parts of the country did not present a standardised picture.
He said that particularly in view of the planned elections on 25 May, nerves were running high in Kyiv.
The Foreign Minister commented, “Not everywhere in Ukraine are the conditions in place to enable voting to actually occur.”
He said that the situation in the east of the country was very tense, and people were still being killed in some places.
However, in Odessa Steinmeier said he had sensed in his talks that “there are very many people who are not prepared to put up with individuals bringing violence into the city”.
He said that there was a civil rights movement which was working to ensure that the conflict parties did not take control.
Steinmeier remarked that although many people were still shocked by the horrors of the past week, the city gave the impression that it was “gradually recovering from the tragic events”.
He felt this was an encouraging sign.
Next stop Paris:
Steinmeier attends French cabinet meeting
Foreign Minister Steinmeier travelled directly to Paris on Tuesday evening,
where on Wednesday he will participate in a cabinet meeting with his French counterpart, Laurent Fabius.
For more information on the visit to Paris, click here.
The European Council in Dublin in April 1990 then set out clearer prospects for the eastern part of Germany.
At the Permanent Representation of Germany to the then European Economic Community (EEC), Eckart Cuntz worked as a counsellor, attending meetings of working groups tasked with dealing with the consequences of the democratic revolution of 1989 for Europeans and Germans.
Federal Chancellor Kohl swiftly made it clear that there should be a reunification of Germany under Europe’s roof, says Cuntz, as well as further integration steps.
With the solution for Germany – and the accession of its eastern part to the EEC within the framework of reunification – the focus shifted further to the East.
Personally, I was always convinced that the momentum was very strong.
These countries will spare no effort and the political pressure also within the European Union is so great that when these criteria are fulfilled, these countries will indeed join, and that is what happened.
Following his talks with Prime Minister Yatsenyuk and his Foreign Minister colleague Deshchytsia in Kyiv, Steinmeier emphasised that both “fully agreed that the presidential elections on 25 May are of crucial importance”.
Together, we also support your efforts to set in motion a national dialogue under Ukrainian ownership  here in the country – by means of round tables at central level and in the regions.
In the afternoon Foreign Minister Steinmeier travelled to Odessa for further talks, to gain a first-hand impression of the situation on the ground.
On 2 May more than 40 people lost their lives in a fire in a trade union house there.
Steinmeier condemned the outbreaks of violence in the south and the east of Ukraine in the strongest possible terms and described the tragedy as a wake-up call.
The tragedy which occurred here 11 days ago which claimed the lives of many innocent people also moved many people in Germany.
Palytsia, for his part, raised the issue of the round table initiative he had proposed in order to enable the re-emergence of a common language and the re-establishment of common ground.
to move the clashes “from the streets to the negotiating table”.
They explained to their German guest that Odessa, as a historic city with many cultural influences, was traditionally a place which strove for peaceful co-existence.
During this period people probably felt this was a very long way away.
At that time, only five years after the end of the Second World War, the world already found itself in a new conflict, the Cold War, and amid the hardships of the post-war period many people had first-hand experience of the rift running through this Europe.
Speech by Dietmar Woidke, Coordinator of German-Polish Cooperation, at the award ceremony for the 2014 Tadeusz Mazowiecki German-Polish Prize for Journalism in Potsdam
Ladies and gentlemen, as journalists you are the ones who demonstrate how authentic European reporting works.
The German-Polish Prize for Journalism is being awarded for the 17th time.
This year 136 contributions were submitted!
the centenary of the First World War, the 75th anniversary of the Second World War, 70 years since the Warsaw Uprising.
Unlike East Germany, which with German reunification became a member of the European Union more or less over night, Poland had to spend many years undertaking arduous preparations for accession.
In this area there should be less talking about and more talking with one another.
They claim that the so-called “Russia apologists” set the tone while Warsaw’s and Tallinn’s concerns are overlooked.
In this hall alone I see numerous friends of and experts on the German-Polish neighbourhood.
As Minister-President and Poland Coordinator for the Federal Government, I am striving to do my part to promote this understanding.
Germany supported Poland’s accession to the EU ten years ago more than any other country.
Now more than 700,000 Poles live in Germany, 11,500 of whom have settled in Brandenburg.
And the most important thing is that
Since 2004 exports from Brandenburg to our neighbour have doubled.
More than 700 cities and communities in Germany are involved in German-Polish town twinning programmes, we have 400 school partnerships and a large number of university partnerships.
Each year almost 110,000 young people from Germany and Poland participate in the events sponsored by the German-Polish Youth Office.
This year a special prize for journalism in the border region, endowed by Land Brandenburg, will be awarded for the first time.
Over the past twenty years this institution has supported no less than 15,000 projects.
Its Director, Professor Bingen, is also here today.
I will use my two roles as Poland Coodinator and Minister-President on this issue – as in other areas – to continue to raise awareness of German-Polish affairs throughout the Länder.
Ladies and gentlemen, I am sure that you will continue to subject the work of policy makers to critical scrutiny.
You all help the general public to discern what Europe means for them in practice,
We are sorry to see Lakhdar Brahimi resign.
I greatly respect his commitment to finding a peaceful solution to the situation in Syria.
Lakhdar Brahimi led the Geneva process with great patience and diplomacy.
In the end he was unable to succeed because the regime in Damascus did not enter into the peace negotiations in earnest.
President Assad’s negotiators were driven not by the wellbeing of Syria and its people, but rather by the desire to hold on to power.
A political solution is the only way to bring peace to Syria and we will continue to strive to achieve this.
Spotlight on Syria
Statement from Foreign Minister Steinmeier on mining disaster in Turkey
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier issued the following statement today (14 May) in response to the major mining disaster in western Turkey. The latest reports estimate that more than 200 people have lost their lives.
I am devastated at the terrible accident in the Turkish coal mine, which has claimed so many victims.
My deepest sympathy goes to those who have lost loved ones, and all who have been injured have my best wishes for a speedy recovery.
Europe is the future –
We hope that they too can be rescued.
Germany stands ready to help if Turkey so wishes.
At this point, we must not lose sight of the prospect of a political process.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier regrets that UN-Arab League Joint Special Representative for Syria, Lakhdar Brahimi, is resigning.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement today (14 May) on the resignation of the UN-Arab League Joint Special Representative for Syria, Lakhdar Brahimi:
Our thoughts are also with the miners who are still trapped.
Minister of State Roth is welcomed by his Polish counterpart Serafin
When he met Polish students, Roth discussed the current situation in Ukraine.
In addition to this he visited the Warsaw Rising Museum and the Museum of the History of Polish Jews.
The German Minister of State underlined how very important German-Polish cooperation was to the EU as a whole,
stating that this was particularly evident in the current crisis, in which the EU was speaking with one voice. He continued:
Now we must use diplomacy to prevent a further escalation in the violence in Ukraine.
We will only achieve this if the EU continues to pull in the same direction,
In his speech at an event hosted by the Friedrich Ebert Foundation and the Institute of Public Affairs in Warsaw, Roth also spoke of how Poland and Germany could work together for a Europe of solidarity.
The Minister of State stressed:
Whether the issue is energy or social cohesion –
nowadays, no member state can manage alone.
That is why cooperation in Europe is the right answer to globalisation.
Roth was impressed by how much the Polish people approved of European integration, making Poland one of its drivers.
Germany and Poland’s particular responsibility
Warsaw Rising Museum – entry in the visitor’s book
The Minister of State paid his respects to the victims of Nazi crimes in Poland in the Warsaw Rising Museum and the Museum of the History of Polish Jews.
That was another reason why Germany and Poland had a particular responsibility to work side by side to prevent a new division of the continent, stated Roth as he concluded his visit to Warsaw.
Assistance for victims of sexual violence
Order of St John project in North Kivu
Steinmeier visits French cabinet
Steinmeier seated next to the French President in the cabinet meeting
Mines themselves can also be certified as “conflict-free” if they meet certain safety and social standards and the mines and transport routes are not guarded by armed groups.
Germany’s Federal Institute for Geosciences and Natural Resources (BGR) has therefore launched a project to certify tin, tungsten, tantalum and gold, known as the four “conflict resources”.
Human Rights Commissioner Strässer spoke to BGR experts and talked to them about the success of the project.
Strässer also met with government representatives including Minister of Social and Humanitarian Affairs Charles Nawej Mundele and the Vice-Governor of North Kivu Province.
A sign of mutual trust
On the way to the Élysée
Strässer also called on the Congolese government to live up to its responsibility and do everything in its power to uphold human rights and prevent humanitarian disasters.
The “Heal Africa” hospital in Goma
Schools build bridges: Minister of State Böhmer honours German schools abroad
In Goma, Human Rights Commissioner Strässer visited a camp for refugees and internally displaced persons.
Schools build bridges: Minister of State Böhmer honours winners of the German Schools Abroad Competition
Bild: Minister of State Böhmer with the winners of the third place, the German school in Santiago de Chile
The motto of this year’s award ceremony was “Pupils build bridges worldwide”.
Prizes were awarded to German schools in Turkey, Ireland and Chile:
10 years of Poland and Germany in the EU together
On 12 May, during his visit to Warsaw, Minister of State for Europe Roth met his counterpart Serafin and the Undersecretary of State at the Polish Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
In Warsaw on 12 May, Minister of State for Europe Michael Roth met his counterpart Piotr Serafin and Undersecretary of State at the Polish Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Henryka Mościcka-Dendys.
We must ensure that the Ukrainian elections can take place on 25 May.
and that is why German-Polish coordination is vital.
It was not only Poland that had benefited from EU enlargement, but Germany and the EU had also gained from Poland becoming a member of the EU, said Roth.
Our union of shared values is very attractive to our neighbourhood but nonetheless we must work constantly to protect it from populists.
The cabinet discussed topical matters in foreign and European affairs.
Roth said that the painful history of the two countries made him all the more pleased that they were committed to not forget the past and to better understanding each other.
Speech given in Warsaw by Minister of State for Europe Michael Roth: “Europe is the future – 10 years of Poland and Germany in the EU”
Strässer was impressed by the commitment shown by the German aid organisations in the country.
Importance of German schools abroad
The hospital also runs a therapy programme for victims of sexual violence.
Schools build bridges to Germany
Thanks to the fact that they welcome children of all nationalities, however, the schools were increasingly functioning as bridges to Germany:
Visiting the HIV ward in the “Heal Africa” hospital
The German schools are a vibrant expression of our culture of welcome.
They are the most enduring means of instilling enthusiasm for our country, language and culture in young people.
Here, too, Commissioner Strässer underscored Germany’s willingness to further support activities to treat and reintegrate people affected by sexual violence.
They gain the hearts of young people around the world and help our country in the global competition to attract the brightest brains.
The Minister of State also said that many countries were interested in Germany’s dual system of vocational training.
Ending impunity
The German schools abroad prepared their pupils not only for academic professions but, in some cases, also for skilled trades.
The Minister of State reaffirmed that the dual system of vocational training is to be further developed at German schools in cooperation with the Chamber of Commerce Abroad and local business communities.
Strässer with the police unit for the protection of women and children
Strässer then met with representatives from the NGOs “Voix des Sans-Voix” and ASADHO (Association Africaine des Droits de l'Homme), and with the Director of the UN Human Rights Office, Scott Campbell.
Together they discussed the peace process in the Congo, the restrictions on freedom of assembly and the obstacles faced by human rights defenders.
The Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid at the Federal Foreign Office, Christoph Strässer, visited the provinces of North Kivu and Kinshasa in the Democratic Republic of the Congo between 25 and 29 April.
The consultations with the German Foreign Minister also covered bilateral relations,
The two Foreign Ministers also reported on matters including the situation in Ukraine.
He is the first Foreign Minister of another country to have been afforded this honour.
German support in humanitarian emergencies
Commissioner Strässer assured his interlocutors that Germany would continue to help DR Congo improve the human rights situation and deal with humanitarian emergencies.
Christoph Strässer’s next appointment was in the “Heal Africa” hospital, which treats children with physical disabilities.
He said that the Congolese state had to do more to put an end to impunity and protect the victims of sexual violence.
The German Foreign Minister’s presence at the cabinet table was a sign, Fabius said, of the great trust between France and Germany and the fact that the two Foreign Ministers worked “side by side every day”.
He considered the special police unit in Goma for abused women and children, which is funded and equipped by Germany, to be a step in the right direction – but more needs to be done.
A gift of cathedral windows for Reims
In April 2014, the German Government made available another 1.5 million euros in order to alleviate the suffering of the people from the Central African Republic who had fled across the border to the Congolese province of Equator.
Minister of State Böhmer presented the awards at the world conference of the Chambers of Commerce Abroad to the three winners of the Chamber of Industry and Commerce’s 4th German Schools Abroad Competition 2014.
On 13 May, Maria Böhmer, Minister of State at the Federal Foreign Office, and Eric Schweitzer, President of the Association of German Chambers of Commerce and Industry (DIHK), presented three prizes endowed with a total of 80,000 euros to the winners of the 4th German Schools Abroad Competition 2014.
first prize and a cash sum of 40,000 euros went to the German department at the Istanbul Lisesi, whose project “No Abitur yet, but already a student” paves the way for academically gifted pupils to study in Germany.
The second prize and 25,000 euros was won by the German school St Kilian in Dublin for its environmental activities as a “Green School”.
The German school in Santiago de Chile won the third prize with its social project “C.A.S.A.” (Centro de Acción Social del Alemán) and was awarded 15,000 euros.
In her speech, the Minister of State stressed the outstanding importance of the German schools abroad:
due to the demographic development and the shortage of skilled workers, their work will be ever more important.
Böhmer went on to say that the competition thus demonstrated the special recognition of the German business community and emphasised after the event:
The successful engagement of German industry around the world would not be possible without the work of the German schools abroad.
The Minister of State said that the schools offered an excellent education for the children of those working for German companies abroad.
Steinmeier and Fabius speaking in the courtyard at the Élysée
The original windows were destroyed by German artillery during the First World War.
“We are donating them both in commemoration and with our faces turned towards a bright shared future.”
To further strengthen Franco-German cooperation at foreign minister level, they agreed, among other things, to undertake joint trips to the European Union’s eastern and southern neighbourhoods.
Human Rights Commissioner Strässer in DR Congo:
His focus there was on humanitarian projects being run by German and international organisations, projects to protect victims of sexual violence and the human rights situation in DR Congo.
Martin Kobler, the Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and General Alberto dos Santos, UN Force Commander, briefed Strässer on the current security situation in the east of the country.
DR Congo is rich in natural resources. However, these often exacerbate existing conflicts.
He learned more about the occupants’ state of health and visited a health centre set up by the Order of St John Emergency Service.
An education programme run there is designed to ensure that the children are able to go to school and join the workforce after their treatment.
At the same time he urged Congolese society not to stigmatise victims of sexual violence, but to accept them and let them return to the community.
Strässer also deplored the number of sexual crimes committed by members of the Congolese security forces, which is as high as ever.
Germany provided over 12 million euros for humanitarian assistance in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the year 2013 alone.
Franco-German bridge builder receives Carlo Schmid Prize
Compensation for victims of sexual violence, in particular victims of members of the armed forces, was an issue in this context, too, thus highlighting the impact that human rights violations have on efforts to establish democracy and the rule of law in DR Congo.
On the basis of many years working with the recipient, Steinmeier said he was convinced the prize was going to a “great friend and European”.
As such, the Minister continued, the prize was in part a recognition of the political work Ayrault had done for Franco-German relations.
Supporting Tunisia on its path to democracy, 24 – 25 April
He joined his French counterpart, Laurent Fabius, in attending a meeting of the cabinet chaired by President François Hollande.
Fabius described Steinmeier’s participation in the cabinet meeting as moving and significant.
German artist Imi Knoebel is to design the last six windows, which are located in two chapels.
In addition, the two Foreign Ministers used part of the 90-minute session to give an account of their trip to Moldova, Georgia and Tunisia (23 – 25 April).
After his talks in Ukraine, Foreign Minister Steinmeier flew to Paris, where he and his counterpart Laurent Fabius briefed the French cabinet on the situation in Ukraine.
After his talks in Ukraine on Tuesday (13 May), Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier travelled on to Paris.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier had previously visited the French capital for talks two weeks ago.
He arrived back in Paris on Tuesday evening,
where there was a first planned for the following day: on Wednesday (14 May), Steinmeier joined France’s Foreign Minister Fabius at the cabinet meeting of the French Government.
President Hollande seated the “new member” on his right at the cabinet table, where Foreign Minister Fabius usually sits.
and Steinmeier reported on the talks he had held in Ukraine the day before (13 May).
In view of this year’s commemoration of the outbreak of the First World War, Foreign Minister Steinmeier announced that the German Government would be providing the funds to replace the six remaining temporary windows in Reims Cathedral, France.
They also agreed to report together on those visits at the two sides’ cabinet meetings.
After the cabinet meeting, Foreign Minister Steinmeier attended the award ceremony for the Carlo Schmid Prize in Paris.
He delivered the speech honouring this year’s prizewinner, former French Prime Minister Jean-Marc Ayrault, at the event held in the residence of German Ambassador Susanne Wasum-Rainer.
Steinmeier speaking in honour of former Prime Minister Ayrault (5th from right), who received the Carlo Schmid Prize
In front of the many high-level German and French guests, the German Foreign Minister commended Ayrault as a “Franco-German bridge builder”.
With this prize, the Carlo Schmid Foundation recognises individuals who have made a valuable contribution to preserving and developing the rule of law and European understanding.
Read more on the Carlo Schmid Foundation website.
Speech by Foreign Minister Steinmeier in honour of Jean-Marc Ayrault, recipient of the 2014 Carlo Schmid Prize (14 May 2014)
Trip by Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Fabius to Moldova and Georgia, 23 – 24 April,
It’s not possible to talk about Europe at the moment without addressing the dramatic developments in Ukraine.
For those of us born in the post-war period, war is almost inconceivable.
I grew up in eastern Hesse, right next door to the then border between East and West Germany.
Ministers meet in London:
Foreign Minister Steinmeier travelled to London for talks on 15 May.
Focus on Syria and Ukraine
His various meetings centred on the situation in Syria and Ukraine.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier travelled to London today (15 May) for various talks.
The Foreign Ministers of Great Britain, France, Italy, the USA and Germany also met in “quint” configuration to discuss the situation in Ukraine.
Creating humanitarian access
The UN Security Council is currently preparing a resolution about the humanitarian situation in the country and the establishment of humanitarian corridors.
Germany increases aid to victims of the conflict in Syria (15 January 2014)
Spotlight on Syria
Foreign Minister Steinmeier visits Ukraine for talks (13 May 2014)
Germany expressly supports this resolution.
We are united in our determination to make full use of all options to help the people in the conflict zone.
We will take in more Syrian refugees, to help ease the pressure on the countries bordering Syria.
Since the start of the civil war in 2012, Germany has made available some 514 million euros to Syria, including roughly 283 million euros worth of humanitarian assistance.
In 2013, Germany was the third-largest bilateral donor to Syria, after the US and the UK.
Round table is a “good start”
The Foreign Ministers of Great Britain, France, Italy, the USA and Germany had already met in the morning in “quint” configuration to discuss the situation in Ukraine.
It was his impression that it would be possible to hold the presidential elections in an environment conducive to their legitimacy.
I said a few moments ago that
To read a detailed account of Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s trip to Ukraine, click here.
Steinmeier commented positively on the round table, which met for the first time on 15 May, calling it a “good start”.
The next meeting should be held within the next few days, for, as Foreign Minister Steinmeier said:
There are only ten days left until the presidential elections – there is no time to lose!
Statement by Foreign Minister Steinmeier on the resignation of UN Special Representative Lakhdar Brahimi (14 May 2014)
Woidke, who had travelled to Zgorzelec in Poland in his capacity as Coordinator of German-Polish Intersocietal and Cross-Border Cooperation, said today (15 May 2014) at the press conference held to mark the signing:
The two governments conducted the negotiations with resolve.
For Berlin and Warsaw recognised that a safe border region is key to thriving German-Polish relations.
It was time to negotiate an agreement in keeping with the times.
During the negotiations, it was important to keep in mind the very different legal and organisational structures in Poland and Germany.
The regulations agreed upon will greatly improve cross-border cooperation between police, border and customs authorities in future.
In addition to joint patrols, suspects can be followed by both German and Polish officers across the border into the respective neighbouring country.
Furthermore, the agreement makes the formation of operational groups feasible.
This would make it possible to work together to combat those behind Europe-wide organised crime.
Woidke: “The agreement will increase security in border regions.”
Cross-border police cooperation: German-Polish agreement means “improved cooperation”
Ukraine conflict:
Steinmeier in Kyiv and Odessa
Core Group of the Friends of the Syrian People © UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office
Coming out of a meeting of the Core Group of the Friends of the Syrian People, Steinmeier stressed the need for humanitarian access in order to get aid to the people in the conflict zone.
The Syria Core Group meeting focused on the humanitarian situation in the country and the predicament of Syrian refugees abroad.
Following the meeting, Foreign Minister Steinmeier likewise underscored the need to establish humanitarian access to the conflict zones.
The Foreign Minister flew to Ukraine for the third time in only a few weeks.
This is a small but direct and important contribution to preserving the stability of this fragile region.
The Trust Fund we set up with the United Arab Emirates can now boast total pledges of approximately 100 million euros.
Steinmeier and UK Minister of State Hugh Robertson
The presidential elections scheduled for 25 May were the crucial step, Steinmeier emphasised after the meeting.
In his talks with Ukrainian leaders, he stressed the importance of the presidential elections and the OSCE’s efforts to promote national dialogue.
He also visited Odessa.
He pointed out that he had been in Kyiv and Odessa on 13 May, and had seen the situation for himself.
It was an early start to a hard journey.
His first stop was Kyiv.
Steinmeier has repeatedly said how important it is to hold orderly elections throughout the country in order to lend legitimacy to the Ukrainian leadership:
[Steinmeier] “I think we fully agree that the presidential elections on 25 May will play a crucial role.
State Secretary Steinlein visist Jordan
He is visiting on the occasion of the “German weeks” taking place in Amman which provide visibility to the wide-ranging and close cooperation between Germany and Jordan.
Re-opening of the Desert Castle Mshatta
Part of the Mshatta palace’s façade was given to Kaiser Wilhelm II as a present during a trip to the region at the beginning of the 20th century.
During his trip, State Secretary Steinlein will also meet Jordanian Foreign Minister Judeh for political talks which will address, amongst other things, the ongoing crisis in neighbouring country Syria and its consequences for Jordan.
Exploration, restauration and reconstruction of the early Islamic Desert Palace Mshatta in Jordan
He felt there was no standardised picture.
But Odessa gave cause for hope:
[...] Many people still feel shock and outrage, but the town seems to be slowly recovering from the horrific events that happened here.
and get on the plane to Paris.
Then it was time for the German Foreign Minister to say goodbye
After his talks in Kyiv, Steinmeier flew to Odessa.
Steinmeier’s first appointment in the city was with the newly appointed Governor of Odessa, Ihor Palytsia.
[Steinmeier] “We are here in the centre of Odessa, at the scene of a dreadful tragedy which took place 11 days ago.
Steinmeier emphasised that the situation in the country appeared far from uniform.
One key issue discussed at this meeting was the planned presidential election of 25 May.
Dietmar Woidke, the German Government’s Coordinator of German-Polish Cooperation and Brandenburg Minister-President, described the signing of the German-Police police agreement by Poland’s Interior Minister Bartłomiej Sienkiewicz and Federal Interior Minister Thomas de Maiziére in Zgorzelec as “huge progress towards improved cross-border cooperation.”
Woidke stated: “The agreement will increase security in border regions.”
He also had meetings with civil society and university representatives.
As he later walked through Odessa city centre, the German Foreign Minister remarked that his take on the situation in Ukraine was changing.
I find that encouraging.”
At our last meeting, and again today, we discussed how to establish conditions that will give all voters the chance to vote.”
On Tuesday, Foreign Minister Steinmeier set off on his third visit to Ukraine in only a few weeks.
The situation there remains critical; Foreign Minister Steinmeier is persevering with his diplomatic efforts to defuse the conflict.
At the airport, he met Foreign Minister Deshchytsia and Interim Prime Minister Yatsenyuk.
The talks in Kyiv also focused on further strengthening the OSCE mission and its efforts to establish a national dialogue.
All parties to the conflict should take part in this mediation process, Steinmeier argued again in his talks with Interim President Turchynov.
Steinmeier met with OSCE representatives in the Ukrainian capital.
They discussed various issues, including the appointment of former German diplomat Wolfgang Ischinger to co-moderate the first round table.
He wanted to see for himself the place where, barely two weeks ago, more than 40 people died in a sudden outbreak of violence.
The politicians in Kyiv seemed nervous about the planned elections, and in the east the atmosphere remained dangerous.
On Saturday, 17 May 2014, State Secretary Stephan Steinlein will travel to Jordan for a visit lasting several days.
The zenith of the German weeks will be when, at a ceremony on Sunday, 18 May, State Secretary Steinlein will join His Royal Highness Prince El Hassan in re-opening the Desert Castle Mshatta. Over the course of recent years the palace has been restored thanks to substantial financial support from Germany.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier on the flooding in Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina
“There is still no end in sight to the catastrophic floods in Serbia and in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Germany has offered assistance to both countries.
A mobile laboratory in West Africa
The record rainfall in Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina over a period of several days has led to floods which by Saturday had claimed more than 20 lives.
Tens of thousands of people have had to be evacuated.
THW experts are coordinating German assistance.
Statement by Human Rights Commissioner Strässer on the International Day Against Homophobia and Transphobia
Christoph Strässer, the Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid, issued the following statement today (17 May 2014) on the International Day Against Homophobia and Transphobia:
The Federal Foreign Office is also supporting the activities of the European Commission laboratory currently helping diagnose cases of Ebola in Guéckédou, 700 km from Conakry.
These Ebola-related measures are part of the German Partnership Program for Excellence in Biological and Health Security.
They are active across 20 countries altogether.
The Federal Foreign Office is responding to the current Ebola crisis as part of its Partnership Programme for Excellence in Biological and Health Security.
Partnership programme to protect people from dangerous contagious diseases
One aim is to prevent any misuse of infectious agents that could also pose a threat to Germans abroad.
A sign of mutual trust:
at the invitation of France’s President Hollande, Foreign Minister Steinmeier took part in a meeting of the French cabinet on 14 May, the first Foreign Minister of another country to do so.
On 16 May 2014, German Ambassador to the WHO Thomas Fitschen and WHO Assistant Director-General Keiji Fukuda signed an Agreement under which the Federal Foreign Office will make 400,000 euros available to the WHO to help fight the Ebola virus.
This comes after the 110,000 euros which the Federal Foreign Office provided to the Bernhard Nocht Institute (BNI), also engaged in the fight against Ebola, at the beginning of May.
These include the Robert Koch Institute, the Friedrich Loeffler Institute, the Bundeswehr Institute of Microbiology and the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH.
To strengthen and advance Franco-German relations –
that’s what Foreign Minister Steinmeier and his opposite number in France, Laurent Fabius, pledged to do when they first met in Paris.
Human Rights Commissioner Strässer on the award of the Hans Litten Prize to Turkish lawyer Selҫuk Kozağaçlı
Today, Turkish lawyer Selçuk Kozağaçlı is receiving the Hans Litten Prize, awarded by the Association of Democratic Lawyers (VDJ).
I would like to warmly congratulate him on this.
At the same time, I deeply regret that he is unable to receive this award in person.
Mr Kozağaçlı was detained pending trial for over a year for carrying out his work as a lawyer.
The proceedings against him give cause for concern.
This brings hope that from now on, standards fully in line with the rule of law will be observed.
I call for a fair trial for Mr Kozağaçlı.
This week, the two men met in the French capital for the sixth time in as many months.
Lawyers’ offices were searched, files were confiscated and allegations were made that directly related to the lawyers’ professional activities.
He is accused of being a member of a terrorist group (the DHKP-C).
Foreign Minister Steinmeier had just been in Ukraine. He and his French host concurred that France and Germany liaise closely on current political issues.
this Wednesday saw a significant first.
Steinmeier and Fabius took the short walk through central Paris together, heading from the French Foreign Ministry
to the Élysée, the official residence of the French President.
President Hollande welcomed both Foreign Ministers in the palace courtyard –
for he had invited the German Foreign Minister to join a meeting of the French cabinet.
Seating Steinmeier on his right, President Hollande introduced him as the “new member” at the cabinet table.
change through rapprochement.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier today (17 May) issued the following statement on the flooding in Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina:
More than 20 people have died. Tens of thousands have lost their homes and an equal number are without electricity and supplies.
The scale of the disaster is not yet entirely clear.
We extend our deepest sympathies to the families who have lost relatives as a result of the floods.”
In many places the flood water has not yet reached its highest point.
Meteorologists say this is the worst flooding in the region since records began.
The German Embassies in Belgrade and Sarajevo are keeping in constant touch with the local authorities.
The consultations chaired by the French President were intensive,
Speaking to the press on the steps of the Élysée afterwards, they underlined the Franco-German perspective which had chiefly shaped the discussions.
Laurent Fabius described the presence of his German counterpart as very moving in that it showed in a very special way that the Foreign Ministers worked side by side every day.
Federal Foreign Minister Steinmeier attends French cabinet meeting
That’s not acceptable.
Today’s International Day Against Homophobia and Transphobia is another occasion on which to remind ourselves that, despite many movements in support for this group, the recognition of LGBTI rights is facing setbacks in many parts of the world.
Unfortunately, however, the reasons for this have mostly been negative – the recent entry into force of the Anti-Homosexuality Act in Uganda, for example.
This makes Conchita Wurst’s victory in this year’s Eurovision Song Contest all the more gratifying, as it shows that tolerance and openness are possible in Europe.
Homosexual, bisexual, transsexual and intersexual people the world over have, like everyone else, a right to dignity and the protection of their privacy.
While they live in fear of oppression, violence, discrimination or persecution, they cannot be said to enjoy these fundamental rights.
We have limited instruments at our disposal to achieve such global freedom from discrimination.
We can only keep on reiterating our position and advocating cooperation and a frank exchange of views.
On 20 May the Federal Foreign Office and the Salzburg Global LGBT Forum will be holding a public debate to discuss long-term approaches to ensuring lasting support for LGBT and human rights organisations throughout the world.
Members of LGBT and human rights groups from China, Germany, India, Lebanon, Russia, Uganda, the UK and the USA will discuss topical issues in this field with representatives of the Federal Foreign Office.
I have the impression that the discussion of the legal and social recognition of homosexuality and transsexuality is now much more to the fore than it has been in recent years, and this I fundamentally welcome.
It’s therefore all the more shocking that Europe has again been hit by a conflict of this magnitude.
100 years after the outbreak of the First World War, 75 years after Germany’s invasion of Poland and 25 years after the end of the Cold War, it seemed that this threat had long since been banished.
But now Europe again faces the question of war or peace, of the continent’s unity or division.
When I think of people in Ukraine at this time, then I also remember my own childhood and youth.
I’m a child of the Cold War.
There are very many people in this room today who neither remember nor personally experienced the division of Europe.
The Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid and Member of the German Bundestag, Christoph Strässer, issued the following statement today (17 May 2014) on the award of the Hans Litten Prize to the lawyer Selҫuk Kozağaçlı:
On 21 March 2014 he was released on the condition that he did not travel abroad.
Following the abolition of specially authorised courts by the fifth judicial reform package, this case has now been given to a court of general jurisdiction.
On 18 January 2013, the Turkish police took 15 layers and members of the Contemporary Lawyers’ Association (CHD) into custody.
On 21 January 2013 arrest warrants were issued for nine of those detained, including Selҫuk Kozağaçlı.
Selҫuk Kozağaçlı was in pre-trial detention from 18 January 2013 to March 2014.
Steinmeier is the first Foreign Minister of another country to have been afforded this honour —
a clear sign of mutual trust.
both on the subject of the Ukraine conflict and on the two Foreign Ministers’ joint trip which took them to Moldova, Georgia and Tunisia three weeks ago.
Until I left school, there were no endless horizons and the freedom to travel was limited.
That was terrible for our neighbours in the GDR, but also depressing for me and my friends in the West.
That can’t be emphasised often enough,
particularly today when so many complain that Europe has developed over the years into a project for an elite divorced from reality.
Whether during the demonstrations in Leipzig, on Prague’s Wenceslas Square or in the Gdansk shipyards – it was these people who tore down the Iron Curtain and thus courageously took the first step towards the subsequent unification of our continent.
There’s no doubt that the revolutions in Central and Eastern Europe were due first and foremost to the efforts of many ordinary people!
That the fall of Communism would result in a united, democratic Europe was by no means a foregone conclusion.
However, even after this first step had been taken, it was far from certain that this would lead to the establishment of stable democracies.
Belarus is sad proof that the end of dictatorship doesn’t necessarily lead to democracy.
Sometimes it simply leads from one dictatorship to the next.
However, democracy and the rule of law are what safeguard our liberty, our freedom of press and opinion as well as our political participation.
Thus, anyone who looks back today and assumes that the development towards democracy and the rule of law was a matter of course and that there was more or less no alternative, has underestimated the complexity of politics.
The admittance of the Central and Eastern European states to the European Union on 1 May 2004 marked the end of the East-West divide in Europe.
As new EU members, the ten states returned from the periphery to the heart of Europe.
The European Union held out the clear prospect of later EU membership to the young Central and Eastern European states at a very early stage.
For with the clear goal of EU membership ahead, the candidate countries embarked on an impressive path of reform which amounted to nothing less than a second revolution.
The total restructuring of the economic and social welfare systems, the political system and society is no walk in the park – it places heavy demands on people.
Today, ten years after EU accession, we can say with some self-confidence:
the road to reform was difficult and stony.
Yet it was worth the effort for most people.
That applies in particular to the many in the European countries worst hit by the crisis who now feel that they are the greatest losers of the reform and consolidation process.
They have to make sacrifices on a daily basis and accept a decline in the standard of living to which they have become accustomed.
While the sacrifices are immediately noticeable, the positive effects usually materialise much later.
It’s precisely this experience of having to wait for the benefits of the reform policy long after these painful sacrifices have been made which people in Central and Eastern European states can pass on to people in the countries hit by crisis today.
Ten years ago, the European Union not only became bigger and stronger but also richer and more diverse due to the eastward enlargement:
Eastward enlargement is a unique success story.
I could cite a whole series of figures and statistics to illustrate this success.
I could tell you that in 1999 the economic output of the eight Central and Eastern European accession states was less than 40 per cent of the EU average.
Poland is a prime example, for its economy continued to grow steadily between 2008 and 2013 despite the economic and financial crisis.
I could also mention Latvia, which adopted the euro at the start of 2014, or Lithuania, which will follow suit on 1 January 2015.
The above-average approval rate for European integration of more than 80 per cent is anything but a matter of course at a time when Eurosceptic rhetoric has become fashionable.
On the contrary, Germany is among the biggest winners of eastward enlargement and the free movement in the European single market.
According to a study carried out by the Association of German Chambers of Commerce and Industry, a total of one million jobs have even been created or secured by eastward enlargement.
For there are problems.
When, for example, the independence of the judiciary is openly questioned in individual countries, the freedom of press is under threat or if efforts to fight corruption and organised crime are not sufficient, we cannot simply look the other way.
Let me be quite frank:
there were, or still are, developments in Bulgaria, Hungary or Romania which I find worrying.
Likewise, Italy under Silvio Berlusconi came in for criticism.
The Agency for Fundamental Rights even told us Germans that
we have to do much more to combat anti-Semitism in our country.
We all have to make an effort.
For Europe is not just a single market and a monetary union. Above all, it is a unique community of shared values.
We have to insist on this even though it’s sometimes difficult to make such demands on friends.
Given our own history, we know that Germany shoulders a special responsibility here.
We should remember this when we talk about the weaknesses in European foreign policy, which are so often pointed out.
The European Union has had a lasting impact on an entire continent – and the enlargement policy was the most effective foreign policy instrument at its disposal.
The enlargement transformed the EEC with its six founding member states and around 200 million inhabitants into a grouping of currently 28 members with an overall population of 500 million.
Despite all the successes, the EU enlargement policy cannot be taken for granted.
In the last few years, a certain enlargement fatigue has spread through many parts of Europe.
Particularly in times of economic and financial crisis, many ask themselves whether the EU shouldn’t solve its own problems before it admits new members.
A Europe which is to remain open cannot ignore the fears and concerns of its population.
Policies need acceptance and legitimation.
That applies in particular to the states of the Western Balkans.
In contrast to the past, no more political concessions can be made when a country joins the EU in future.
The strict accession criteria must be complied with in full before a country can accede.
The EU must ensure that its citizens agree with the enlargement process through greater transparency and improved communication.
Accession negotiations are not a technical process for experts but, rather, a political project for the whole of society.
That’s a task which we politicians haven’t tackled sufficiently to date.
In this connection, allow me to say a few words about Turkey – especially to those who are now demanding that the EU should break off the accession negotiations in the light of recent developments.
There’s no doubt that Turkey doesn’t fulfil the accession criteria at present.
Nevertheless, it would be absolutely counter-productive to place the accession negotiations with Turkey on hold.
In the end, stopping the talks won’t help anyone.
We therefore now have to focus on justice, fundamental rights and the fight against corruption.
The EU’s capacity and readiness to admit new members leads me to the European Neighbourhood Policy, the ENP.
It was created in 2004, in the context of the major eastward enlargement.
The EU wanted to foster stability in its neighbourhood and draw neighbouring countries closer to the EU – without granting them a direct prospect of accession.
Ukraine is currently highlighting in an unprecedented fashion that the EU needs to rethink its answers.
We have 16 partners in Eastern Europe, North Africa and in the Middle East who are very different and cannot all, or don’t all want to, move towards the European Union.
We have to critically review our neighbourhood policy in the light of that.
Shouldn’t we become more flexible here and offer countries in our neighbourhood tailor-made and creative solutions?
That could also apply to financial support instruments, which we should be able to steer at shorter notice than has been the case so far.
Further-reaching offers could be made to more advanced partners such as, for example, free trade agreements or the creation of a common economic space.
For this is not about marking out spheres of influence but about ensuring that cooperation with other partners continues to be possible.
In the concrete case of Ukraine, that means:
Ukraine will always be a bridge between the EU and Russia, for it’s too close to Russia and too close to the EU to choose between them.
Europe has to better pool its efforts: we need closer and more effective cooperation between the EU Commission and the European External Action Service than we have today.
The revamping of the neighbourhood policy will be one of the key tasks for German foreign policy in the coming years.
Germany has already put forward proposals in conjunction with France and Poland.
Particularly the experiences of our Polish friends can be used to resolve the Ukraine crisis.
France, on the other hand, can play a prominent role in the Mediterranean region.
It has profoundly changed, strengthened and enriched Europe and the European Union.
However, a glance at Europe’s neighbourhood to the east and south also shows that the key tasks facing European foreign policy will lie here in the coming years.
No matter in which direction I look, I believe that the crucial factor remains what Willy Brandt started decades ago:
The British historian Timothy Garton Ash said only recently that today Europe needs a Willy Brandt who can translate a policy of small steps into larger inspiring words.
Perhaps there is someone here today who can follow in his footsteps.
That would be something!
Interview given by Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier on the current situation in Ukraine.
Published in the Thüringer Allgemeine newspaper (17 May 2014).
Quite the opposite, in fact.
How frustrated are you by that?
Of course we would have liked to see more progress.
Startseite: Aid for flood victims in South-Eastern Europe
Bosnia and Herzegovina as well as Serbia are experiencing the worst floods for 120 years.
Croatia has also been hit.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier has pledged the countries affected German assistance.
Germany provides aid for flood victims in South-Eastern Europe
The dramatic flood disaster in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia and Croatia has claimed more than 40 lives to date.
Human Rights Commissioner Strässer on the detention of journalists in Egypt
Several hundred thousand people have had to be evacuated.
At the same time numerous other journalists are being detained in Egypt or are being taken to court for their reporting activities.
I call on the Egyptian Government to respect the right to freedom of expression as guaranteed by the constitution.
The Egyptian authorities must also ensure that imprisonment, prison conditions and trial procedure consistently adhere to the human rights standards which Egypt has pledged to the international community to uphold.
Numerous journalists from the news agency Al Jazeera have been in detention since 2013.
Peter Greste, Baher Mohamed and Mohamed Fahmy have been in custody since December 2013, accused of conspiring with the Muslim Brotherhood (MB).
Abdullah Elshamy was detained in August 2013.
To date no charges have been brought against him.
According to reports from his family he has been on hunger strike for four months, as a result of which
he is now said to have been placed in solitary confinement.
Tens of thousands have lost their homes
and an equal number are without electricity and supplies.
No improvement in the situation is in sight at present.
Water levels in the Sava, Drina, Danube and other rivers in the region are the highest since records began.
Natalia Gherman came to the Federal Foreign Office for her first official visit on Monday.
German aid for the flood victims
In the region, people living along the major rivers are preparing for renewed flooding.
Thousands of emergency services personnel and volunteers are working around the clock to improve flood defences.
Christoph Strässer, the Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid, issued the following statement today (19 May 2014) on the detention of journalists in Egypt:
I am deeply concerned about the health of detained Egyptian journalist Abdullah Elshamy, who has been on hunger strike for four months and who was placed in solitary confinement on 12 May 2014.
Mr Elshamy has been in custody since August 2013 and to date no charges have been brought against him.
This also applies to the upcoming presidential elections on 26 and 27 May.
Allowing the media to report freely before, during and after the elections as well as enabling civil society to engage with this process are vital elements of this.
Every Egyptian Government has a duty towards its citizens to protect human rights and fundamental freedoms and to guarantee the rule of law.
Their trial has recently been rescheduled for the eighth time.
He was arrested reporting on the violent clearance of an MB protest camp.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier pledged aid for the region affected on Saturday (17 May):
“This will bring the people of our countries closer together, and if foreign policy can achieve that, it has achieved a lot.”
The next step will be the signing of the association agreement between Moldova and the EU in late June.
The timetable is set (...).
Voices from the CSU commented your travels as follows:
Huge expense, no recompense.
Helmut Schmidt said:
Further aid measures are being coordinated.”
Bilateral relations with the Republic of Moldova
As the country’s direct neighbour and in view of the frozen conflict in Transdniestria, Moldova is following developments in Ukraine with particular concern.
Against this backdrop, both foreign ministers reaffirmed their commitment to a political solution to the conflict.
THW starts operating large-scale pump
Bild: THW pump near Kolubara
The funds are being used to support the work done by the state-owned Federal Agency for Technical Relief (THW).
On Sunday (18 May), THW staff began operating the first large-scale pump in the Serbian region Kolubara.
Germany has been supporting efforts to de-escalate the situation and has campaigned for the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) to play a strong role in Ukraine.
Steinmeier: Aid is European solidarity in action
Are you hurt by that?
“It is good that the Federal Agency for Technical Relief has provided crucial assistance swiftly and professionally to people affected by the major flood disaster. That is European solidarity in action.”
On Monday, another THW team is due to arrive in Bosnia to help people combat the flooding.
The German Ambassadors in the region are in close contact with the authorities and are coordinating German aid on the ground.
Bild: Lorries from the Federal Agency for Technical Relief (THW) on their way to the flooded region
Steinmeier warns against new rift dividing Europe
Steinmeier, Strässer and the members of Forum Menschenrechte
For it wasn’t possible to travel East,
We were curious about what we would find on the other side of the Wall.
People in my constituency in northern Hesse waited at the border crossings for their neighbours from the former GDR and welcomed them with open arms.
When we think back today to the incredible joy we felt at that time, then we realise that united Europe emerged 25 years ago as a true grassroots movement.
For it was people in the GDR, Poland, Czechoslovakia or in Hungary who – often risking their lives – peacefully struggled to gain something for which no-one had dared hope: a life in democracy and freedom.
This has also been brought home to us quite forcefully once more by the latest developments in our eastern neighbourhood and in the Arab states.
This accession perspective was an engine for both reform and stability!
The efforts of politicians and business, and most especially of citizens on the road to the EU were huge.
Today we can learn throughout Europe from these experiences of political, economic and social change, as well as of temporary setbacks.
This trove of experience can serve as a model and incentive for us when it comes to making the European Union strong enough to withstand crises and ensuring it’s fit for the future.
Richer in terms of language, culture, ideas, creativity as well as life chances.
Since then, these states have caught up in breath-taking fashion and achieved 61 per cent of the overall average in 2013.
What’s more, in Poland citizens stand more firmly behind the pro-European course than in almost any other member state.
It’s good news!
And in the old member states, many worries and concerns have – fortunately – proved to be unfounded: job losses, wage dumping or unchecked mass immigration – none of these horror scenarios has materialised.
However, if we are to assess the situation honestly, we cannot simply ignore problems and difficulties despite all the good news.
In these matters, we expect our partner countries to halt adverse developments and take the necessary corrective measures.
In order to preserve the success of the enlargement policy, the European Union must, in my view, consider the following points:
Rather, we should continue to use the accession talks as a tool to foster political and social change in Turkey.
In this, the question of the interconnectivity and compatibility with other economic areas always has to be considered.
This year, the appointment of a new Commission and a new High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy provide a good opportunity for change.
The enlargement of the European Union remains a success story.
The EU has to stand by its commitments and pledges to countries seeking membership.
The EU has to pursue an enlargement policy with clear, strict and fair accession criteria.
However, the European Union also has to do its homework, for we have to keep on reforming the Union and its institutions in order to be able to admit new members and remain effective.
Forum Menschenrechte was founded 20 years ago.
“Germany has offered assistance (...).
This machine can pump out up to 25,000 litres of water per minute from the flooded areas.
The umbrella association of German human rights organisations has around 50 members, including well-known organisations such as Amnesty International, the German Trade Union Confederation (DGB), Human Rights Watch, the Lesbian and Gay Federation in Germany (LSVD) and Reporters without Borders.
It is not open to the public.
More about the German Government’s human rights work:
Human rights
Joint efforts to ensure greater respect for human rights
For more information on the topics presented above, visit the Forum Menschenrechte website.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier and his Moldovan counterpart Natalia Gherman used the latter’s first official visit to Berlin to discuss, among other things, the imminent signature of Moldova’s association agreement with the EU and the crisis in Ukraine.
working together towards political settlement of the conflict in Ukraine
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier and his Moldovan counterpart Natalia Gherman used the latter’s first official visit to Berlin to discuss, among other things, the imminent signature of Moldova’s association agreement with the EU and the crisis in Ukraine.
Bilateral issues were also on the agenda.
When the German Foreign Minister and his French counterpart Laurent Fabius visited Moldova three weeks ago, Steinmeier did not meet his Moldovan colleague.
Now the two foreign ministers have met in Berlin for the first time;
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and his Moldovan counterpart, Natalia Gherman
One focus of their talks was Moldova’s process of moving closer to the EU.
At a press conference afterwards, the two foreign ministers welcomed the fact that Moldovan citizens had been able to enter the EU visa-free for three weeks now.
According to Minister Gherman, some 18,000 Moldovans have already made use of this.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier also expressed his pleasure, saying,
We will be in touch with one another constantly, discussing how the obligations laid down in the association agreement can be met as efficiently as possible; this concerns domestic reforms in particular, as we have just been saying, in the field of justice and regarding the fight against corruption.
searching for political solutions
Another focus of the talks between Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Gherman was the conflict in Ukraine.
During his last visit to the country on 13 May, the German Foreign Minister expressed his hope that the setting up of round tables as part of the national dialogue would help ease the tensions.
The second set had taken place the previous weekend.
Speaking in Berlin on Monday, Steinmeier outlined the scope and opportunities open to the round tables:
(The round tables) are to help overcome blockages and get parties who are unwilling to talk to one another doing exactly that.
This is a process made even more difficult by the fact that recent weeks and months have seen so many deaths and injuries.
Therefore we now have to walk the stony path of bringing the parties to the conflict and their representatives back together.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier emphasised how important this was so that the presidential elections scheduled for 25 May could take place with as many people casting their votes as possible.
Moreover, Steinmeier concluded, this was the only way of achieving stabilisation of the entire region, i.e. beyond Ukraine itself.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier announces a further six million euros in humanitarian aid for South Sudan
Commenting on the donor conference for South Sudan in Oslo, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier issued the following statement today (20 May):
The donor conference for South Sudan comes at a critical time.
To this end, we will provide a further six million euros.
It is vital for people in the country to gain access to aid supplies and seeds quickly as the rainy season has started and they must now till their fields.
Which is to say that
I urgently appeal to the conflicting parties to lay down their arms and protect the aid supplies of the international community.
On Monday, Foreign Minister Steinmeier and the Federal Government’s Human Rights Commissioner, Christoph Strässer, took part in their annual dialogue with representatives from the organisation Forum Menschenrechte (Human Rights Forum).
The annual meeting of the Foreign Minister and the Federal Government’s Human Rights Commissioner with representatives from the national network of German human rights organisations has been a vauled tradition for many years.
As in previous years, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier and the Federal Government’s Human Rights Commissioner, Christoph Strässer, once again invited  the umbrella organisation’s members to participate in an exchange of views at the Federal Foreign Office.
On Monday (19 May), Foreign Minister Steinmeier and the Federal Government’s Human Rights Commissioner, Christoph Strässer, met representatives from the organisation Forum Menschenrechte.
The topic of their talks at the Federal Foreign Office was Germany’s human rights priorities around the world.
This year’s discussions focused on current challenges such as the crisis in Syria and Germany’s role on the United Nations Human Rights Council.
Support for human rights activists and corporate responsibility in the area of human rights were also on the agenda.
A long-standing and valued tradition
The annual meeting of the Foreign Minister with representatives from Forum Menschenrechte has been a valued tradition for many years.
The meeting at the Federal Foreign Office is one of the highlights of ongoing dialogue with civil society.
We must mobilise further funds in order to help people in South Sudan and avert a looming famine.
Including the six million euros pledged today, Germany has made available a total of 12.5 million euros for humanitarian aid in 2014 in order to improve the situation of people in South Sudan.
In addition, it has provided 1.7 million euros for refugees from South Sudan in neighbouring Uganda and Ethiopia.
The funds are being used to support projects run by international and non-governmental organisations.
What the world expects from Germany:
Steinmeier opening the conference in the Weltsaal
It was with this question that Foreign Minister Steinmeier opened the first event of “Review 2014 – A Fresh Look at German Foreign Policy”.
Mr Steinmeier, your mediation efforts in Ukraine haven’t made any progress.
The situation is serious.
We cannot accept any military option.
We have a responsibility to prevent that and to use every opportunity to deescalate the conflict and find a path towards peaceful resolution.
But more often than not diplomacy moves forward with small steps.
And every act of violence, like in Slavyansk, Odessa and Mariupol, sets it back by long strides.
Yet from my point of view there is no alternative to fighting day in day out for a diplomatic solution.
I won’t dwell upon that for a second.
To be honest, the conflict is too dangerous and time is too precious given the tense situation to waste time on utterances like that.
As far as Ukraine is concerned, no-one has any idea what to do – and he seems to include you as well.
Foreign policy as a balancing act
There is no quick fix for a complex conflict like this.
We can only try to approach the problem from various angles and proceed step by step.
The first step will be the presidential elections on 25 May, which, the hope is, will lend fresh democratic legitimacy and more authority to the Kyiv Government.
The second step would be a new constitution giving the regions, particularly in eastern Ukraine, more rights and greater powers, and the third step would be parliamentary elections.
Simultaneously, perpetrators of violence must be disarmed and webs of corruption combatted.
Isn’t that just wishful thinking?
An overall solution is not going to fall out of the sky just like that.
We have no other possibility but to advance partial solutions step by step.
and reproduced by kind permission of the Thüringer Allgemeine.
We are not talking about a regional conflict here. What is at stake is no less than a new rift dividing Europe – with unforeseeable consequences for Germany as well.
Moldovan Foreign Minister visits Berlin
According to the Foreign Minister, Germany had to perform the “balancing act” of fulfilling increased international expectations and, at the same time, the demands often voiced by the German public for more restraint in the field of foreign policy.
The first round of discussions revealed the diversity of demands that the international community has of Germany.
“Looking back – looking forward – European integration” – speech by Minister of State Michael Roth at the Schwarzkopf Foundation
where the Wall, fences and fragmentation mines systems were to be found.
We thus rejoiced all the more when the Iron Curtain was finally swept aside in 1989.
Perhaps we’ll manage together to revive the excited can-do spirit we experienced 25 years ago.
Structural reforms do need time before they start to have an impact.
Thus, seven of the ten accession countries will be members of the eurozone by next year.
That’s why our partners in Central and Eastern Europe, who have committed themselves to a Europe of fundamental values, can be certain of our full support for the reform course they’ve embarked upon.
The transforming power of the enlargement policy has changed Europe as a whole for the better.
Especially in view of our concerns given recent developments in Ukraine, we have to actively shape the future of Europe’s neighbourhood.
A common future can only succeed if we cooperate, move closer together and don’t work against each other.
When asked what the world expected from Germany, international experts presented their views and ideas about German foreign policy.
This international view was then contrasted with opinions from within Germany, when Thomas Paulsen of the Körber Foundation presented a survey on what Germans thought of their country’s foreign policy.
According to this survey, 60 percent of people interviewed were against Germany’s greater involvement in world affairs.
Yet a clear majority of respondents were in favour of more engagement in specific areas such as humanitarian aid, diplomatic negotiations and arms control.
Click here to see the detailed results of the survey.
The analysis of the survey’s results in the second panel discussion made clear that Germany’s foreign policy faces major challenges.
Participants agreed that involvement in world affairs was often – but wrongly – equated with military engagement.
Responsibility for the things we do and don’t do
Élisabeth Guigou, for example, demanded that the French and German Governments take a common position with a view to security policy towards Africa.
Arvid Bell, in turn, urged the participants to reconsider the words used in the debate.
However, all the participants pointed out the chances that the review process offered.
Christiane Hoffmann, for example, said that it was current events such as the crisis in Ukraine that were forcing us to reconsider the basic direction of Germany’s foreign policy.
Startseite: Minister of State Roth in Madrid
Foreign Minister Steinmeier took up the issue of Ukraine in his closing speech, saying that the current crisis had highlighted a “lack of direction” in Germany’s foreign policy.
He also underscored that it was important not to be indifferent to the problems the world was facing.
Closing speech by Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier at the conference “Review 2014 – A Fresh Look at German Foreign Policy”;
According to Norbert Röttgen, this was why the review process had to be used to better inform the public about the different instruments of foreign policy, thus justifying Germany’s approach in this field.
Making Europe more socially just: Minister of State Roth in Madrid
During his visit to Madrid on 18 and 19 May, Minister of State for Europe Michael Roth met Engracia Hidalgo Tena, the Spanish State Secretary for Employment.
Far too many young people are unemployed.
Reforms, consolidation, growth and employment belong together
Bild: Minister of State Roth with young people in Madrid
The German Minister of State was especially keen to gain a first-hand impression of the economic and social situation in Spain during his visit.
Europe is our life insurance
Another focus of the talks in Madrid was the forthcoming European elections.
Minister of State Roth commented as follows:
United Europe is our shared life insurance.
Conference at the Federal Foreign Office to launch the Review 2014 initiative
On Tuesday morning Foreign Minister Steinmeier invited international experts to take a critical look at Germany’s foreign policy.
On Tuesday morning (20 May) Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier invited international experts to take a critical look at Germany’s foreign policy.
The participants discussed Germany’s involvement in world affairs and its foreign policy instruments before an audience of more than 400, while many more were watching the conference on the internet.
In his speech he indicated the aims of the initiative – launching a self-critical and open-ended debate with a broad public on what form Germany’s foreign policy should take today.
A strong and socially just Europe: with a view to gaining a first-hand impression of the economic and social situation of ordinary citizens, Minister of State Roth met young people and representatives of social welfare associations and trade unions during his talks in Madrid on 18 and 19 May.
Roth exchanged views with young people and trade unionists on the ongoing difficulties on the labour market in both Spain and Europe.
In a “disordered world” Germany needed to give a “new direction” to its foreign policy, Steinmeier said.
Fuat Keyman, Director of the Istanbul Policy Center, called for closer cooperation between Turkey and Germany on the Syria crisis.
Views of Germany’s foreign policy from inside and outside
Angela E. Stent praised Germany’s leading role on the Ukraine crisis, but at the same time suggested that it should include elements of “hard power” in its “soft power” approach.
Roth emphasised the joint European responsibility for young people affected by unemployment.
That is a European and not just a Spanish problem.
Élisabeth Guigou and the German Foreign Minister in the Weltsaal
Europeans therefore have a responsibility to help young Spaniards and give them hope of a better future.
In his view this was not about “communicating” the German Government’s policy, but rather about entering into a frank dialogue on what this policy should look like.
“If we assume responsibility we are just as responsible for the things we don’t do as for the things we do.”
This was why we needed a broad and nuanced debate, for which the conference had been an excellent starting point, he went on to say.
Together with representatives of the chamber of commerce, German companies and a German vocational training school, he discussed what impetus was needed to boost economic growth and employment.
Germany is helping Spain in its efforts to strengthen the dual system of vocational training and to finance small and medium-sized companies.
Germany and Spain are working closely together within the framework of the European Employment Initiative.
Among others, Minister of State Roth met PSOE European affairs spokesperson Juan Moscoso to discuss this.
Not least the crisis in Ukraine has shown what really matters in Europe,
namely peace, freedom and democracy and not the curvature of cucumbers or the ban on olive oil jugs.
Europe is faced with a crisis of confidence.
We therefore have to take a firm stand against populists and eurosceptics.
He commented as follows:
The funds made available by the EU for the Youth Employment Initiative must now be released as quickly as possible so that swift and concrete assistance can be given.
elections are a crucial milestone
Foreign Minister Steinmeier met with his Ukrainian counterpart Deshchytsia in Berlin.
The focus lay on the presidential elections scheduled to take place on Sunday and the work of the round tables.
The focus was on the presidential elections due to take place this Sunday, and the work of the round tables within the framework of the national dialogue launched by the OSCE and Ukraine.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier views these elections as a crucial milestone in the further development of the situation in the eastern European country – something which he made clear last week during his trip to Kyiv and Odessa.
Managing to set the course for national understanding
since then two “round tables” met in Kharkiv and Kyiv within the framework of the national dialogue.
They are being chaired by two former Ukrainian Presidents Leonid Kuchma and Leonid Kravchuk, together with the former German diplomat Wolfgang Ischinger.
At the press conference which followed, Foreign Minister Steinmeier said that with these efforts towards de-escalation, they may have succeeded in planning a “few details of a joint course”.
Nevertheless he said he still saw “serious risks”, above all in light of the situation in eastern Ukraine.
Elections present chance of a fresh start
The German Foreign Minister considers Ukraine’s presidential elections planned for Sunday to be of paramount importance:
they are “a crucial milestone and present a real chance of a fresh start in Ukraine. That could be the key to recovering economic and political stability.”
Steinmeier had already stressed the importance of the elections in affording the Ukrainian leadership new legitimacy.
It was therefore important that as many people as possible in all Ukraine, including in the East, could participate in the elections:
Steinmeier stressed that he knew that both the interim Government in Ukraine and the round tables were working to make this possible.
A president should be elected who would also be recognised in the East, he said,
thus it was precisely the people there who should be most interested in the vote as a means to create new legitimacy.
To this end, he met representatives of Caritas and young unemployed people.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier held another meeting with his Ukrainian counterpart, Andriy Deshchytsia, this time in Berlin.
Presidential elections are due to take place in Ukraine this coming Sunday (25 May).
In Berlin the two Ministers discussed the latest developments in Ukraine following their last meeting on 13 May –
In an interview with Deutsche Welle (20 May), Steinmeier invited in particular “the critics of political change” to vote.
Against this background he held another round of consultations with his Ukrainian counterpart Deshchytsia, five days before the elections.
Steinmeier welcomed his counterpart Deshchytsia’s announcement that a third round table is set to take place before the elections.
It was due to convene tomorrow in Mykolaiv, said Deshchytsia.
A hearty hand-shake between Steinmeier and Deshchytsia
Steinmeier opens David Bowie exhibition
Foreign Minister Steinmeier has opened the David Bowie exhibition in the Martin-Gropius-Bau.
Steinmeier said he was pleased that Bowie is back in the city:
“Quite simply, he belongs here.”
Es werden auch 60 Exponate aus Bowie’s Berliner Jahren (1976-78) ausgestellt.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier at the David Bowie exhibition
The human rights situation in eastern Ukraine and in Crimea has deteriorated significantly – this is the conclusion of the latest report by a UN monitoring team in Ukraine.
UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay
UN report on human rights situation in Ukraine released
The human rights situation in eastern Ukraine and in Crimea has deteriorated significantly – this is the conclusion of the latest report by the United Nations (UN) Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine.
According to the monitoring team, in parts of eastern Ukraine an atmosphere of lawlessness reigns and in Crimea minorities like the Crimean Tatars are facing discrimination.
“Atmosphere of lawlessness”
Shortly before the presidential elections in Ukraine, due to take place on 25 May, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights published the latest report from its monitoring team in Ukraine.
In it, the UN team highlights a significant deterioration of the human rights situation in eastern Ukraine and in Crimea:
The report states that the Crimean Tatar minority faces discrimination in Crimea.
Moreover, the introduction of restrictive Russian legislation on the peninsula (including for non-governmental organisations) had led to an overall deterioration of the human rights situation.
Progress in implementing the Geneva Statement
Pro-European demonstrators’ barricades in Kyiv
The UN team did nonetheless have some positive news to report:
the Ukrainian Government had, up to now, cooperated well with the mission and willingly provided information.
Progress could also be seen regarding the implementation of the Geneva Statement:
a bill on the right to freedom of peaceful assembly had been submitted, furthermore a discussion on decentralisation measures in the country had been proposed.
In terms of criticism, the UN team questioned the proportionality of some of the Ukrainian security forces’ actions as part of its “counter terrorism operation”.
Finally, the report lists individual attacks, above all on pro-Russian presidential candidates.
Importance of the presidential elections
On the release of the current report on 15 May, UN High Commissioner Navi Pillay stressed the importance of free, fair and transparent elections in Ukraine.
On 20 May, Foreign Minister Steinmeier expressed a similar view at a joint press conference with the Ukrainian Foreign Minister Deshchytsia:
The importance of these presidential elections cannot be overstated.
They are a crucial milestone and present a real chance for a fresh start in Ukraine.
The UN monitoring mission was set up upon request of the Ukrainian Government in March 2014 in order to clarify the circumstances of the human rights violations suspected to have been committed during the Maidan protests.
Furthermore the mission is tasked with monitoring the situation in eastern Ukraine and in Crimea.
Report on the human rights situation in Ukraine of 15 April 2014 (PDF, 592 KB)
Report on the human rights situation in Ukraine of 15 May 2014 (full version) (PDF, 876 KB)
Germany increases aid for flood victims in South-Eastern Europe
and an equal number are still without electricity or water.
German aid for the flood victims increased
Thousands of emergency services personnel and volunteers are still working around the clock to improve flood defences.
The funds will be used directly to help people cope with the disaster and remedy the damage caused.
The Federal Foreign Office first of all made available 350,000 euros for emergency flood measures.
The funds are going to the Federal Agency for Technical Relief as well as other relief organisations providing emergency assistance on the ground in the disaster areas.
in parts of eastern Ukraine an atmosphere of lawlessness reigned in which killings, torture, kidnappings and intimidation were being carried out by armed groups, involving representatives of the media and pro-Ukrainian activists in particular.
The situation of people in Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina as well as other areas hit by the flood disaster continues to be dramatic.
No improvement is in sight at present:
water levels in the Save, Drina, Danube and other rivers in the region are the highest since records began.
They are reinforcing dykes with sandbags along stretches of the rivers at particular risk.
We, Germany and the Federal Government, stand shoulder to shoulder with those suffering.
Today, the Foreign Minister decided to step up our emergency humanitarian aid.
Statement made at Federal Press Conference, 21 May 2014
On behalf of Foreign Minister Steinmeier, I would like to express our deepest sympathy with the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia who are affected by the disastrous flooding in the Balkans.
We are supporting the tireless assistance efforts with financial means, but are also providing personnel from the Federal Agency for Technical Relief (THW) among others.
The Federal Government has now made available one million euros for aid measures carried out by humanitarian relief organisations, including the THW.
Hundreds of thousands of people have had to be evacuated.
Germany increases aid for flood victims in South-Eastern Europe South-Eastern Europe has been hit by the worst floods for 120 years.
In the light of the current situation, Foreign Minister Steinmeier has decided to increase Germany’s flood aid to one million euros.
In the light of the ongoing difficult situation, Foreign Minister Steinmeier decided on Wednesday (21 May) to increase Germany’s aid for the flood victims in South-Eastern Europe to one million euros.
Lorries from the Federal Agency for Technical Relief (THW) on their way to the flooded region
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier initially pledged aid for the region affected on Saturday (17 May):
Experts from the Federal Agency for Technical Relief (THW) have already arrived in Serbia.
On Wednesday (21 May) the assistance was increased by 650,000 euros to a total of one million euros.
THW pump near Kolubara
Experts from the state-owned Federal Agency for Technical Relief (THW) are assisting in the fight against the flooding.
On Sunday (18 May), THW staff began operating the first large-scale pump in the Serbian region Kolubara.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier stated on Monday (19 May):
A further THW team has been in action in Orasje in northern Bosnia and Herzegovina, a town hit particularly hard, where it is helping people combat the flooding.
Click here to find out more about what the THW is doing to help flood victims in South-Eastern Europe
Foreign Minister of Kuwait visits Berlin
50 years of diplomatic relations
The German and Kuwaiti Foreign Ministers at the press conference
A special occasion for a meeting –
Kuwait’s role as a mediator
Arrival at the Federal Foreign Office
Following the resignation of UN Joint Special Representative Lakhdar Brahimi, the position as mediator needed to be taken up by someone new in order to seek a political settlement with “a new and broader approach”.
Steinmeier stressed that the situation of Syrian refugees in the neighbouring countries Turkey, Lebanon and Jordan had to be improved.
In recent months, Germany and Kuwait had worked “in close cooperation” to provide humanitarian assistance to the refugees, according to Steinmeier.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier praised the country’s “role as a mediator” within international cooperation and with regard to Kuwait’s work on the Gulf Cooperation Council.
Bilateral relations between Kuwait and Germany
Dealing with homophobic legislation in countries such as Russia and Uganda was also discussed.
In the concluding session, participants presented the results of their work and discussed the strategies that have proved more or less successful in the past.
The central question was whether LGBTI organisations operating in politically difficult contexts ought to be supported with great publicity or rather out of the public eye so as not to put the activists themselves at risk.
Getting in touch with missions abroad
Launch of the film “Parada”
The German cabinet today decided on its new Federal Government Policy Guidelines for Africa.
The new document summarises the principles and focuses of Germany’s Africa policy.
New guidelines for Africa policy –
The role German missions abroad can play in supporting LGBTI activists was also discussed.
The German cabinet today decided on the new Federal Government Policy Guidelines for Africa drafted by the Federal Foreign Office.
The guidelines summarise the context, principles and focuses of Germany’s Africa policy.
These new guidelines show the German Government recognising the rapid changes taking place in Africa and the continent’s new position in the world.
There are many different positive developments across the continent, but challenges remain as well.
At the same time, our African partners and the international community as a whole are expecting more of Germany.
Making our instruments dovetail better
African Union headquarters in Addis Ababa
The German Government therefore wishes to take a comprehensive approach to Africa policy that pays due consideration to the opportunities as well as the risks inherent in collaboration.
There is to be even better dovetailing between the work of the various ministries – such as humanitarian assistance from the Federal Foreign Office, development projects backed by the Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development and support for peace missions provided by the Federal Ministry of Defence.
The Minister’s full statement is available here.
Supporting positive developments
Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement on today’s cabinet meeting:
Africa has changed.
Steinmeier continued:
These policy guidelines are to help us both provide more targeted support to positive developments in Africa and counteract crises and dangers more swiftly and decisively.
Boosting African ownership
Visiting the new building of the AU Peace and Security Department
The underlying objectives of the new strategy are to boost African ownership and regional integration as well as to provide support on good governance, the rule of law, economic development and crisis prevention.
Germany intends to actively support African training institutions by providing military and police training personnel and, for example, helping set up an African Union police unit.
Participating in peace missions
However, this will not prevent Germany from also providing vital capabilities to European and other international missions.
Support is currently going to the European Union and United Nations missions in Mali, EUTM and MINUSMA; the EU’s Operation Atalanta to combat piracy off the Horn of Africa; and the UN mission in South Sudan, UNMISS.
The new policy guidelines are the product of an extensive consultation process which the Federal Foreign Office launched at the start of this year.
They replace the previous Strategy for Africa adopted in 2011 by the last German Government.
The new guidelines aim to create even better dovetailing between the work of the individual ministries, so that they can respond more quickly, decisively and effectively than before.
Federal Government Policy Guidelines for Africa (PDF, 191 KB)
Foreign Minister Steinmeier in Ethiopia, Tanzania and Angola (23 – 27 March 2014)
Regional focuses: Africa
Germany’s endeavours are to be tailored to suit individual countries and regions and set priorities for cooperation.
For example Foreign Minister Steinmeier pledged an additional six million euros in humanitarian aid for South Sudan on 20 May.
Many positive developments in our neighbouring continent, growing prosperity and successful regional cooperation, have just as direct consequences for us in Europe as conflict and terrorism, migratory pressures and political instability.
The Foreign Minister explained that this was why Germany had to broaden its perspective on Africa and adapt its set of policy tools to Africa’s diverse conditions.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier used his Africa trip in March 2014 to find out about Africa’s security architecture and progress made on developing African peace and security capabilities.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier announces a further six million euros in humanitarian aid for South Sudan (20 May 2014)
supporting the security architecture, boosting African ownership
After the meeting, Minister of State Roth issued the following statement:
In a few weeks’ time, Germany’s close partner Italy, a particularly integration-minded EU member state, will assume the EU Presidency
I am certain that Europe will move forward and grow stronger under the Italian Presidency.
In 2014, both countries are celebrating the 50 years of diplomatic relations.
50 years ago, Germany and Kuwait established diplomatic relations.
Alongside bilateral topics, in their first meeting the two Foreign Ministers addressed regional topics such as the Syria conflict and Iran’s nuclear programme.
At the subsequent press conference Foreign Minister Steinmeier commented on Iran, stating that he was still hoping to resolve the years-long dispute by the middle of the year.
Iran was still obliged to adhere to the agreed timeframe and to help reach solutions, he added.
The German Foreign Minister said that the situation regarding the conflict in Syria, ongoing since 2011, was “highly concerning” and “far from a political settlement”.
In many conflicts in the region, Kuwait had adopted a position which was very reasonable and geared towards understanding, highlighted Steinmeier at the press conference.
The first talks between Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier and his Kuwaiti counterpart, Sheikh Sabah Khalid Al-Hamad Al-Sabah, focused on bilateral relations and regional topics.
The first talks between Foreign Minister Steinmeier and Sheikh Sabah Al-Sabah focused on bilateral and regional topics.
In his meeting with his counterpart Sabah Khalid Al-Sabah in Berlin today (21 May), Foreign Minister Steinmeier made it clear that these were “outstandingly good relations”, in terms of both economic and political exchange.
The Federal Foreign Office has invited 12 representatives of the Salzburg Global LGBT Forum to Berlin for a discussion of ways to support human rights organisations campaigning for LGBTI rights.
Creating lasting support networks
The Human Rights Commissioner opening the panel discussion
Homosexuality is a punishable offence in more than 70 countries, and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transsexual and intersexual persons (LGBTI) have their human rights violated all over the world.
The Federal Foreign Office invited 12 representatives of the Salzburg Global LGBT Forum to Berlin for a discussion of ways to provide sustainable support to human rights organisations in these countries.
“The debate about LGBTI rights is becoming ever more prominent around the world.
Unfortunately, while the demand for equal rights is on the rise, so are homophobia and prejudice.”
Was with these words that Federal Government Human Rights Commissioner Christoph Strässer launched the final discussion of the Salzburg Global LGBT Seminar meeting held in Berlin from 18 to 21 May.
Successful network-building strategies
Representatives of the Salzburg Global LGBT Forum in Berlin
The meeting, in which 12 LGBTI activists from countries such as Uganda, Russia and South Africa participated, focused on the creation of sustainable support networks for LGBTI-related human rights organisations.
Missions abroad can be important points of contact in the countries concerned.
Thus, participants said, ties between local organisations and the Germany Embassy as well as the embassies of other EU countries played an important role during the organisation of the Belgrade Pride Parade in 2010, contributing significantly to the Parade’s success.
The conclusion was therefore reached that LGBTI activists should try to establish long-term relations with EU embassies without however losing sight of the differences in attitudes towards LGBTI rights within Europe.
Protests with great media impact discreet support
Some participants pointed out that discreet support for LGBTI “behind closed doors” was often more effective in such countries than public statements.
Others advised against action that had great media impact, such as terminating town twinnings, since it was often local LGBTI activists who were held responsible for such thins.
All in all, the discussion showed that networking instruments must be tailored to the country-specific context if LGBTI activists are to be supported in a sustainable way.
After voting in Egypt’s constitutional referendum on 19 March 2011
How do I apply for funding?
Because of the time limit on using the 2014 budget, you should contact the FFO directly before submitting a formal application, to check whether the FFO is in principle able to fund the project you are planning.
Auswärtige Amt Referat VN02-14 11013 Berlin
ifa zivik receives FFO project funding to promote projects run by German and international non-governmental organisations.
Applications for less than 250,000 euros in FFO funding must be submitted directly to the following address:
Applications for FFO project funding totalling over 250,000 euros must be submitted to the following address, either directly or via the mission abroad responsible for your area:
Förderprogramm zivik Linienstraße 139/140 10115 Berlin zivik@ifa.de
Do I have a right to funding?
Nobody is simply entitled to be awarded a grant.
Steinmeier on the military's takeover of power in Thailand
All stakeholders must return to a political process immediately.
It is vital for elections to be held swiftly.
Constitutionally protected fundamental freedoms must be guaranteed.
They include freedom of the press.
Meeting with EU Commissioner de Gucht
The talks focused on current EU and trade policy issues such as the negotiations on the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership.
Steinmeier and de Gucht
The acting government has thus de facto been removed.
On Tuesday, the army had declared martial law.
Both followers and opponents of the government had, however, announced that they were going to continue protesting.
In view of the unstable situation, people wishing to travel to Thailand are advised to consult the Federal Foreign Office website to find out about the latest developments.
On Wednesday, the army brokered crisis talks between government and opposition.
In a televised address to the nation, military leader General Prayuth Chan-Ocha announced on Thursday that army and police had taken power.
Germany is using its transformation partnerships to actively promote democratic change in North Africa and the Middle East.
The support offered is geared to the partner countries’ particular needs and priorities.
The Federal Foreign Office has been supporting projects run by German intermediaries and NGOs as part of this endeavour since 2011.
which went towards implementing more than 200 projects in Tunisia, Egypt, Libya, Morocco, Jordan and Yemen.
It had 50 million euros p.a. at its disposal for such projects in 2012 and 2013,
A similar amount has been made available for 2014.
Italian Secretary of State for European Affairs, Sandro Gozi, in Berlin
On 21 May, Minister of State for Europe Michael Roth met Italy’s Secretary of State for European Affairs Sandro Gozi at the Federal Foreign Office.
Italy’s Secretary of State for European Affairs, Sandro Gozi, visits Berlin
On 21 May, Minister of State for Europe Michael Roth met the Italian Secretary of State for European Affairs in the Prime Minister’s Office, Sandro Gozi, at the Federal Foreign Office in Berlin.
Sandro Gozi and Michael Roth
In addition to the situation in Ukraine, current European policy issues were on the agenda, including institutional and personnel questions following the elections to the European Parliament, the fight against youth unemployment and the further development of a European economic policy committed to social cohesion.
I look forward to working with Sandro Gozi.
Together we will stand against all those who are trying to belittle Europe’s achievements.
The funds are deliberately spread across a broad spectrum of uses, including measures intended to flank the processes of transformation and reform in the countries concerned. The focus can be on any of the following areas:
Democracy-building
Promoting the rule of law
Constitutional reform
Strengthening civil society
Business and employment
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier issued the following statement today (22 May) on the situation in Thailand:
I condemn the seizure of power by the military in Thailand and urge them to exercise the utmost restraint.
Moreover, I appeal to the army leaders to restart the dialogue between Thailand’s political forces.
We call upon all Germans in the country to avoid crowds and keep themselves informed of the Federal Foreign Office Travel and Security Advice which is updated continuously .
This, he said, was necessary “in order for the country to return to normal quickly.”
From now on, there is a nationwide curfew from 10 p.m. to 5 a.m.
The Federal Foreign Office regularly analyses the situation, updating its Travel and Security Advice as necessary, most recently early this afternoon.
The Federal Foreign Office decides on submitted applications after assessing them properly, with consideration to the availability of funds and in accordance with the current Funding Concept and the Administrative Regulations pertaining to section 44 of the German Federal Budget Code (BHO), the General Auxiliary Provisions on Grants for the Promotion of Projects (ANBest-P, information here) and the Special Auxiliary Provisions of the Federal Foreign Office on the Award of Grants (BNBest-AA, information here) currently in force.
Particular attention must be paid to the conditions for funding allocation set out in paragraph 1 of the Administrative Regulations on section 44 of the BHO.
These regulations are, where necessary and in harmony with the general principles of German budget law, also used mutatis mutandis when awarding grants to recipients based outside Germany.
Grants from transformation funds are only possible when allowable as an ODA (Official Development Assistance) contribution by the Federal Republic of Germany.
You can find more information on the website of the OECD:
Foreign Minister Steinmeier has met EU Commissioner for Trade Karel de Gucht in Berlin.
Steinmeier and Aladag discuss Afghanistan film with junior diplomats
“Inbetween Worlds” –
Steinmeier and Aladag with German and French junior diplomats
After the film, they talked about current developments in Afghanistan and the situation of Bundeswehr soldiers and local Afghan staff.
In spite of the summery temperatures, more than 100 junior diplomats from Germany and France came together in the darkened Europasaal in the Federal Foreign Office on Wednesday evening (21 May).
Story of an unusual friendship
Before the film started, Steinmeier quoted former US Secretary of State Kissinger as saying that diplomacy starts with seeing the world though the eyes of others. He hoped the evening would enable the junior diplomats present to see the Bundeswehr mission in Afghanistan through the eyes of the artist.
In “Inbetween Worlds”, her second feature film after her debut, “When We Leave”, German Film Academy Award winner Feo Aladag tells the story of an unusual friendship in crisis-torn Afghanistan.
Feo Aladag wrote the screenplay, directed the film and was the producer on location in Afghanistan.
Almut Wieland-Karimi (ZIF) chairing the discussion
The event was chaired by Almut Wieland-Karimi, Director of the Center for International Peace Operations (ZIF) in Berlin.
Caught between obeying orders and listening to his conscience
Foreign Minister Steinmeier acknowledged that Aladag’s film had moved him deeply because of the personal stories it depicted,
namely the dilemma faced by Afghans working for the international community in their home country and the German soldier’s predicament, caught between obeying orders and listening to his conscience.
At the same time, he said, the film provided an opportunity to take a nuanced look at Germany’s involvement in Afghanistan, to consider the 54 Bundeswehr soldiers who have been killed and the difficult struggle for a stable and democratic Afghanistan.
Steinmeier averred that increases in school education in Afghanistan were not enough of a basis to judge whether or not the mission was justified.
In spite of all the difficulties, Afghanistan and the international community have achieved a lot.
as part of their joint training module in Berlin, 100 German and French junior diplomats attended a showing of the Afghanistan film “Inbetween Worlds” together with Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier and director Feo Aladag.
On 5 April, Afghans had their first opportunity in the history of Afghanistan to vote on a democratic change of leadership; more than nine million children attend school; and the country has almost 100,000 students, 20% of them women.
That is worth a great deal.
Filmed on location
A scene from “Inbetween Worlds”
Feo Aladag expressed her gratitude to the Bundeswehr, the German Embassy in Kabul and Afghan and German advisers on the ground.
Their support, she said, had made it possible to shoot the film on location in Afghanistan.
Asked what response she hoped her film would trigger in politics and society, the director answered:
Film, culture and politics all affect one another.
Films can show what influence political realities have on our lives.
Films can trigger ideas – and above all, films can
Populists and nationalists must not be allowed to determine the way forward for Europe!
ask questions.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier calls on people to vote in the European elections on 25 May
Parallels between fiction and reality
Ahead of the forthcoming European elections, Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement today (23 May):
A high turnout would be a first, crucial step towards making sure that does not happen.
His conclusion was encouraging, however:
“People need people.”
Growth and employment, a sensible immigration policy, the protection of our data and, not least, peace and security in Europe – all of these are issues addressed by the European Parliament!
“The future in Afghanistan will be better than the present.”
Local staff who are in danger can also be given asylum in Germany along with their immediate families.
To date, 128 Afghan staff and 278 members of their families have come to Germany.
We can only master the major issues of our time in a way that best serves us if we all work together.
So much is at stake.
We should not let Europe’s opponents have the last word.
It is important that the citizens of Europe be represented by a strong and effective Parliament.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and director Feo Aladag joined German and French junior diplomats on 21 May to talk about the film “Inbetween Worlds” and the mission in Afghanistan.
It was more of a feast for the eyes than diplomatic training usually is:
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and director Feo Aladag had invited them to a showing of “Inbetween Worlds”, a film about a Bundeswehr soldier and his interpreter in Afghanistan.
For the discussion afterwards, Steinmeier and Aladag were joined by a junior diplomat who had been posted to Kunduz, a Bundeswehr soldier and a former Afghan interpreter for the Bundeswehr.
If we, as a society, have a part in such political decisions as getting involved in Afghanistan, then we cannot hide from the consequences, not now and not in the future.
As members of a global community, we have accepted responsibility for one another. That responsibility is really taking shape now, and it needs to be fulfilled.
The Bundeswehr representative praised the film for its authenticity but said that he had never found himself in the kind of dilemma facing the main protagonist. The former interpreter, on the other hand, saw clear parallels between the story and his own life.
Many interpreters in Afghanistan, he said, were confronted by similar challenges when they tried to mediate between different cultures and traditions.
He assured the listeners that Afghans appreciated cooperation with the international community and would not forget who had helped them over the years.
For all that many challenges remained, he said,
A number of local Afghan staff have been targeted by the Taliban as a result of their work as interpreters and mediators.
The German Government has established a fund, using the budgets of the Federal Foreign Office and the Federal Ministry of Defence, to finance further training and give those affected better long-term employment prospects.
Through the Stabilisation and Association Process, however, the EU is already providing support as the country moves closer to European structures.
However, the EU insisted that Bosnia and Herzegovina meet certain important conditions relating to reform before it would sign.
Since 2007, Bosnia and Herzegovina has received financial support under the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance (IPA).
Operation ALTHEA
Through its EUFOR – ALTHEA operation the European Union has been helping the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina since 2004 to maintain a safe and protective environment in the country.
Some 900 military personnel are still serving with the mission.
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s second foreign policy priority after EU membership is NATO accession.
However, the North Atlantic Council will only approve the Annual National Programme, the key component of MAP status, when certain issues concerning the assignment of military facilities to the state of Bosnia and Herzegovina and their use by its Ministry of Defence have been resolved.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier on the death of renowned German photographer Michael Schmidt
This electoral reform is also the central condition for a credible application for EU membership by Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Consultations among friends:
In his oeuvre, he questioned German identity more than others did, and we all remember his great work EIN-HEIT (U-ni-ty).
Corruption is also being discussed in the dialogue on justice between the EU and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Furthermore, the allocation and distribution of the remaining funds from the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance (IPA) are to be accelerated.
An important milestone in that process was the signing of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the EU and Bosnia and Herzegovina, in Brussels on 16 June 2008.
Women, peace and security
Credible efforts to make the electoral law compatible with the European Convention on Human Rights (implementation of the Sejdic/Finci ruling handed down by the European Court of Human Rights on the passive voting right for minorities) are the core condition.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier is today travelling to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
His visit is intended to express German and EU commitment to ensuring positive developments in the country.
The key element of the new approach is the Compact for Growth with which the EU, in conjunction with international financial institutions, wants to help Bosnia and Herzegovina draw up and implement economic reform programmes.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier is visiting Bosnia and Herzegovina from 26 to 27 May.
With a long series of mediation initiatives by the EU on electoral reform, the EU wants to lend new momentum to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s road towards the EU.
Steinmeier will also be attending the opening of the Forum on Prosperity and Jobs in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
With his visit, the German Foreign Minister intends to express the continued intensive commitment of both Germany and the EU to ensuring positive developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
New initiative for economic reform:
Compact for Growth
Sarajevo old town
Female blue helmets from India in Liberia
The United Nations Security Council regularly considers the role of women in peacekeeping and in conflicts.
The key element of this new approach is the Compact for Growth, with which the EU wants to help Bosnia and Herzegovina draw up and implement economic reform programmes.
Michael Schmidt left his mark of humble greatness on the German cultural landscape.
Only a few days before the European elections, the European Directorate-General of the Federal Foreign Office and the Europe Directorate of the “Quay d’Orsay” came together for joint consultations for the first time.
With the formation of a new government in February 2012, the country has successfully taken the first major steps on its road towards EU membership.
The Agreement had already been initialled in December 2007.
Through its Special Representative, Peter Sørensen, the European Union provides support for Bosnia and Herzegovina as it undertakes necessary reforms in the ongoing pre-accession process.
Peter Sørensen is also head of the EU delegation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
This is a first in the sphere of Franco-German cooperation.
Germany contributes in various ways to the implementation of Resolution 1325 (2000) (PDF, 25 KB).
Steinmeier is also due to see the Chairman of the Council of Ministers.
Aid for Bosnian flood victims
We have lost in Michael Schmidt not only a major artist, but a great teacher who, a self-taught man himself, made a valuable contribution to teaching photography to others.
In another move bringing Bosnia and Herzegovina closer to NATO, the country was invited at the NATO Summit in Bucharest in March 2008, along with Montenegro, to enter into “Intensified Dialogue” with the alliance.
Continuous heavy rains have flooded whole swathes of land in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Electricity and drinking water supplies have been interrupted and bridges destroyed, so that some villages are completely cut off.
The Federal Foreign Office has made available a total of one million euros for measures to tackle the flooding in the Balkans.
Action Plan of the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany on the Implementation of United Nations Security Council Resolution 1325 for the Period 2013–2016 (PDF, 646 KB)
Foreign Minister Steinmeier stated on 19 May:
It is good that the Federal Agency for Technical Relief has provided crucial assistance swiftly and professionally to people affected by this major flood disaster in south-eastern Europe.
That is European solidarity in action.
Potential for political, economic and social reform
The two heads of the Europe directorates, Martin Kotthaus and Pierre Lévy (from left to right)
On Tuesday (27 May) Steinmeier will have a working breakfast with representatives of Bosnian civil society from all three ethnic groups.
Another aim was to give the Europe directorates’ members the opportunity to get to know their opposite numbers even better.
Germany increases aid for flood victims in south-eastern Europe (21 May 2014)
Fourth Report of the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany on the Implementation of Security Council Resolution 1325 (April 2014) (PDF, 634 KB)
German-Bosnian relations
Advancing European policy coordination
Joint working meeting in Berlin
Report of the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany on the Implementation of Security Council Resolution 1325 (“Women, Peace and Security”), November 2010 (PDF, 1 MB).
In 2010 the Third Report of the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany on the Implementation of Security Council Resolution 1325 (“Women, Peace and Security”) was submitted to the Bundestag.
Follow-up resolutions
The adoption of a total of six follow-up resolutions underscores the international community’s determination  conceptually to develop further the goals of Resolution 1325.
The “Women, Peace and Security” package currently comprises, in addition to the original Resolution 1325 (2000) the following resolutions:
1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009), 1960 (2010), 2106 (2013) and 2122 (2013).
Cross-cutting dimension of foreign, security and development policy
The two foreign ministries’ Europe directorates are responsible for the coordination of the German and French Government’s European policies.
At the United Nations Germany is a member of the “Friends of 1325” group, a forum for exchanging information about the status of the Resolution’s implementation and for coordinating joint positions and initiatives.
There they discussed some of the most important challenges in European politics such as energy issues, the forthcoming elections and the EU’s external relations.
Germany participates in the Security Council’s open debates on the implementation of Resolution 1325 and in all UN bodies it urges the importance of taking the demands formulated in the Resolution into account.
Following the death of the renowned German photographer Michael Schmidt, Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement in Berlin today (25 May):
At European level Resolution 1325 is implemented in the context of the European Security and Defence Policy.
He consistently refused to be judgemental and continuously made others his frame of reference. Therein lie the modernity and singularity of his oeuvre.
As a regular participant in the EU’s Women, Peace and Security Task Force, Germany is involved in EU decisions and activities relating to the implementation of Resolution 1325.
His last major work, “Lebensmittel” (“food stuff”), once again foregrounded the detail that indicates the whole – and only recently won him the Prix Pictet.
His work at the Kreuzberg adult education centre was exemplary for the committed involvement of artists in civil society.
The Task Force members are representatives of the European Commission, the Council Secretariat and a number of member states.
Women’s rights and Germany’s engagement
German participation in peace missions
What needs to be changed?
Learn more here …
About this website
Review 2014 intends to take a critical look at German foreign policy.
Join in
Together let us take a fresh look at foreign policy!
Enter our essay competition and follow us on Twitter [Link].
Discuss Review 2014 and German foreign policy in general.
First Franco-German working meeting of the Europe directorates in Berlin
The meeting of the French and German foreign ministries’ Europe directorates was another demonstration of cooperation in the sphere of European policy.
However, the meeting not only focused on current European issues.
For this website we asked more than 50 well-known experts:
We want to hear what you think:
To join in the general discussion, click here.
You can discuss the various topics by going to the articles by the individual experts [Link], our videos [Link] or our blog entries [Link].
In the blog entries you will find articles by the editors of review2014.de and guest contributions in which the authors express their views on specific German foreign policy issues.
Group photo – the members of the two Europe directorates in front of Villa Borsig
Their meeting took place in Berlin’s Tegel district on 22 and 23 May.
Just one week ago, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier took part in a meeting of the French cabinet, the first foreign minister of another country to do so.
The meeting started off on Thursday evening (22 May) with a joint dinner at “Clärchens Ballhaus”, a well-known Berlin restaurant and ballroom, where participants enjoyed waltz music and a traditional dinner of meatballs and Beelitz asparagus.
The following day (23 May), participants met at Villa Borsig in Berlin’s Tegel district.
In addition, the Europe directorates’ task is to shape bilateral relations with the EU member states.
In this way it demonstrates that gender equality, participation and the protection of women are key aspects of foreign and security policy.
Security Council Resolution 1325 (2000) is broadly aimed at promoting the active involvement of women in all phases of conflict prevention and conflict management as well as protecting women and girls from sexual violence and rape in situations of armed conflict.
On 19 December 2012 the German Government adopted a National Action Plan designed to improve implementation of the Resolution.
Security Council Resolution 1325
The German Government has established an Inter-Ministerial Working Group that meets regularly to coordinate action to implement Resolution 1325.
Since 2004 the German Government has reported to the Bundestag on the implementation of Resolution 1325.
In May 2014 it submitted to the German Bundestag its Fourth Report on the Implementation of Security Council Resolution 1325 (“Women, Peace and Security”).
The report outlines the activities and measures taken by the German Government at both national and international level over the period August 2010 to December 2013 to promote the implementation of Resolution 1325.
Since 2004 the German Government has submitted reports in this connection to the German Bundestag.
Alongside its efforts to promote the goals of Resolution 1325 in the United Nations, the European Union, NATO, the OSCE and other international organisations and fora, the German Government provided over the period 2010–2013 some 240 million euros in funding for a total of 108 projects and other activities of relevance to the implementation of Resolution 1325.
The German Government regards the implementation of Resolution 1325 as a cross-cutting theme, which in all its decisions, activities and projects in the realm of foreign, security and development policy needs to be taken into account.
The EU’s Women, Peace and Security Task Force
The EU has drawn up guidelines for the Resolution’s implementation in European peace missions and adopted Council Conclusions on taking account of gender equality aspects in crisis management.
A special English-language website gives an overview of the Task Force’s activities and access to relevant documents.
Sarajevo
In Sarajevo he will meet Government and civil society representatives as well as EU Special Representative Sørensen.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier’s first meeting in the Bosnian capital Sarajevo on Monday (26 May) will be with the EU Special Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Peter Sørensen.
In his talks with Sørensen, Foreign Minister Steinmeier will be focusing on Bosnia’s moves towards the EU.
Like all the states of the Western Balkans, Bosnia and Herzegovina has a prospect of joining the European Union.
While Croatia is already a member of the EU, and Serbia and Montenegro are candidate countries, Bosnia and Herzegovina has not yet applied for EU membership.
This process has been stalling in recent years, however.
Furthermore, a dialogue on justice is to provide the framework for discussing and tackling corruption.
The Compact for Growth will be a major element of Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s opening speech at the Forum on Prosperity and Jobs in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Talks with Government representatives
The Minister will also be holding talks with representatives of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Government.
Following a meeting with his counterpart Zlatko Lagumdžija, Steinmeier will meet the country’s Presidency, made up of one member of each of the three constituent ethnic groups:
The dramatic flood disaster in the country will be a prime issue in the Minister’s conversations with Government representatives.
Mines from the war in Bosnia that have been washed up by the flood waters pose an additional danger.
In addition, a 20-strong team from the Federal Agency for Technical Relief (THW) is in the town of Orašje with heavy-duty pumps to help the local population’s efforts.
Civil society has a special role to play in this country in need of reform; citizens forums have been formed since the demonstrations in February.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier wants to discuss the country’s future and its reform potential, as well as the role of the international community, when he meets the civil society representatives.
Afterwards the Foreign Minister will visit the German automotive parts supplier Veritas, which has operated a plant in a Sarajevo suburb since 2011.
The plant supplies the German car makers VW, Daimler and BMW and is regarded as a successful instance of German investment in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
However, political and administrative reform and an effective campaign against corruption in the country will be crucial for further investment, as Foreign Minister Steinmeier will be pointing out during his visit.
Elections have clearly shown the will of Ukrainian voters
They want Ukrainian unity.
I congratulate Petro Poroshenko on the impressive election result.
Ukraine’s new president is facing major tasks,
the most challenging of them the deep divide in the eastern part of the country.
Given the reports we have seen, I am confident we will come to a favourable conclusion.
You can also find information about events [LINK] throughout Germany at which representatives of the Federal Foreign Office will debate international issues with members of the public. This information will be updated continuously.
You can watch videos on German foreign policy and previous events in the media center.
You will find the frank, sometimes critical answers under the heading External View [Link].
Link:
People in Ukraine turned out to vote because they want confrontation, chaos and corruption to end.
Hence the vast majority gave their vote to a candidate who promised them exactly that.
A candidate who receives more than half of the votes has a clear mandate from the electorate. He is also placed under a great obligation.
If this is confirmed in the final official results, then:
Only if bridges can be build swiftly will Ukraine be stabilised on the political and economic fronts.
It is lamentable that many people in Donetsk and Lugansk were unable to exercise their right to vote owing to intimidation and violence on the part of separatists.
Federal Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier issued the following statement in Berlin today (26 May) on yesterday’s presidential elections in Ukraine:
They want opportunities – for themselves and for their country.
I therefore welcome Mr Poroshenko’s intention of travelling to the eastern part of the country straight away to campaign for the unity of Ukraine.
We will base our analysis of the elections on the OSCE election observers’ assessment.
Credible efforts to make the electoral law compatible with the European Convention on Human Rights (implementation of the Sejdic/Finci ruling handed down by the European Court of Human Rights on the passive voting right for minorities) are the core condition.
This electoral reform is also the central condition for a credible application for EU membership.
The key element of the new approach is the Compact for Growth with which the EU, in conjunction with international financial institutions, wants to help Bosnia and Herzegovina draw up and implement economic reform programmes.
Furthermore, the allocation and payment of the remaining funds from the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance (IPA) are to be accelerated.
In another move bringing Bosnia and Herzegovina closer to NATO, the country was invited at the NATO Summit in Bucharest in March 2008 to enter into “Intensified Dialogue” with the alliance.
An important milestone in that process was the signing of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the EU and Bosnia and Herzegovina, in Brussels on 16 June 2008.
Since March 2014, the EU has been pursuing a new initiative vis-à-vis Bosnia and Herzegovina which addresses the criticism voiced in the popular protests of early February 2014 about that country’s unfavourable socio-economic situation.
Since the end of the Bosnian war in 1995 the international community has also been represented in Bosnia and Herzegovina by a High Representative.
This post was created by Annex 10, Article II of the Dayton Peace Accords of 21 November 1995.
Before the Agreement can enter into force, however, Bosnia and Herzegovina still has to introduce a number of other political reforms.
Ambassador Conze becomes head of the EU civilian mission in Mali (EUCAP Sahel Mali)
German Ambassador Albrecht Conze is to become the first head of the EU civilian mission in Mali (EUCAP Sahel Mali).
His appointment underlines the Federal Government’s continued engagement in cooperation with Mali in various different areas.
EUCAP Sahel Mali aims to strengthen the security forces in Mali by delivering strategic advice and training for the police, Gendarmerie and Garde nationale.
Ambassador Albrecht Conze was most recently Ambassador of the Federal Republic of Germany in Bangladesh.
The development of rule of law structures, among other things, is being discussed in the dialogue on justice between the EU and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The German Foreign Minister issued the following statement in Berlin on Monday morning (26 May) on the conduct of the elections and the expected outcome:
The elections have clearly shown the will of the Ukrainian voters.
Clear mandate from the electorate and a great obligation
The preliminary results show that more than half of the votes went to Petro Poroshenko, who has thus won the election in the first round of voting.
Steinmeier called the result a “clear mandate from the electorate”.
He added that Poroshenko had thus also been placed under a great obligation:
Steinmeier therefore welcomed Poroshenko’s intention to travel to the eastern part of the country straight away to campaign for Ukraine’s unity.
Polling stations remained closed.
Steinmeier stressed that the German Government would base its analysis of the elections on the OSCE election observers’ assessment.
Initial signs from Moscow seem to be pointing in the right direction today.
With regard to Russia’s reaction to the election, the German Foreign Minister added:
Signs from Moscow seem to be pointing in the right direction
Foreign Minister Steinmeier has said that the presidential elections in Ukraine were a clear vote against violence and chaos.
On Monday (26 May), Foreign Minister Steinmeier called the presidential elections in Ukraine a clear vote against violence and chaos.
He said that citizens had thus also voted for a better future and their country’s unity.
he would have to unite the country and, at the same time, advance the reform process.
especially in Donetsk and Lugansk, many people were unable to exercise their right to vote due to intimidation and violence.
I expect all OSCE participating states to follow their election observers’ assessment of the elections and to base their policies towards the elected candidate on that.
Steinmeier pledges further assistance for flood victims
With his visit to Bosnia and Herzegovina Steinmeier intends to express German and EU commitment to ensuring positive developments in the country.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier pledged nearly seven million euros of assistance for victims of the disastrous flooding.
In his talks with Sørensen, Steinmeier focused on Bosnia’s moves towards the EU.
Nonetheless, the EU is providing the country with support within the framework of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement as it moves closer to European structures.
Minute of silence for the victims of the flood disaster
The subsequent Forum on Prosperity and Jobs in Bosnia and Herzegovina began with a minute of silence for the victims of the disastrous flooding in the country.
In his speech, Foreign Minister Steinmeier called the flooding an “unprecedented disaster” and announced that the Federal Government would support the flood victims:
I can say to all of you who are looking despairingly at your ruined homes and are contemplating the exhausting reconstruction process with concern: rest assured that Germany will stand by you in these difficult times!
I am pleased to be able to tell you today that the German Government has agreed to provide five million euros in emergency aid.
New EU-Initiative for economic reform –
Foreign Minister Steinmeier at the Forum for Prosperity and Jobs in Sarajevo
Nonetheless, the flood had also shown that Bosnian society had grown closer in recent days, despite dividing lines between ethnic groups, the Foreign Minister continued.
The people had shown how to accomplish something which the political elites still had to do to prove their mettle –
I call on the political and business leaders of this country to
Read Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s full speech here
Time for courageous reforms
Steinmeier and Lagumdžija
Alongside the flood disaster, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s need to reform was also a key topic during the Foreign Minister’s talks with representatives of the Bosnian Government.
Nonetheless, according to Steinmeier one did notice that certain neighbouring countries had made faster progress towards Europe – in order to “catch up” courageous reforms in Bosnia and Herzegovina were urgently needed, he said.
Three-man presidency
Steinmeier with the country’s three presidents
Izetbegović, Radmanović and Komšić (left to right)
Meeting with business and civil society
Steinmeier wants to discuss the country’s future and its reform potential, as well as the role of the international community, when he meets the civil society representatives.
However, political and administrative reform and an effective campaign against corruption in the country will be crucial for further investment, as Steinmeier will be pointing out during his visit.
Ohrid, FYR Macedonia
The transition to the second phase of SAA implementation (including the further liberalization of movement of capital), first recommended by the EU Commission in October 2009, is currently stalled.
Since then it has re-issued this recommendation every year.
Clear vote by the Ukrainian people
He went on to say that Poroshenko’s expected decisive victory also placed him under a great obligation:
According to the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), Sunday’s presidential elections in Ukraine were marked by a high turnout as well as by the determination of the transitional leadership to adhere as far as possible to international standards.
The OSCE election observers stated that the election day had been overshadowed by violence in eastern Ukraine:
That 38 per cent of the electorate in Lugansk region still turned out to vote was, Foreign Minister Steinmeier stated, an “encouraging sign”.
However, the Council has not yet voted on the matter, not least because Greece might veto any decision to open accession negotiations with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia due to the unresolved issue of the country’s name.
The name "Republic of Macedonia" used in the Macedonian constitution is a matter of dispute between the Greek and Macedonian governments.
Efforts under United Nations auspices to mediate in this dispute have been going on for years.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier is visiting Bosnia and Herzegovina from 26 to 27 May for talks.
In Sarajevo he is meeting representatives from Government and civil society.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier with EU Special Representative Sørensen.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier’s first meeting in the Bosnian capital Sarajevo on Monday (26 May) was with the EU Special Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Peter Sørensen.
Sørensen is also Head of the EU Delegation to Bosnia, one of the biggest EU Delegations worldwide.
Five million euros of emergency aid
Continuous heavy rains have flooded whole swathes of land in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Electricity and drinking water supplies have been interrupted and bridges destroyed, so that some villages are completely cut off.
Moreover, the German Government would make one million euros available for the removal of mines and dangerous munitions from the war in Bosnia that have been washed up, said Steinmeier.
Since the popular protests of February 2014 about the poor economic situation in the country, the EU has been pursuing a new initiative vis-à-vis Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In the joint press conference with his counterpart Zlatko Lagumdžija, Foreign Minister Steinmeier first gave his thanks for the “warm welcome in this beautiful European city of Sarajevo.”
The German Foreign Minister and the Federal Chancellor were therefore hosting a large conference on the Western Balkans on 28 August, which neighbouring states will also attend and which will address the whole region’s journey towards Europe.
Since March 2012 the European Commission has been conducting a "High-Level Accession Dialogue" with the Government of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia aimed at driving forward reforms in accession-relevant sectors.
This also highlighted Bosnia and Herzegovina’s European prospects.
In the afternoon, Steinmeier also met the Chairman of the Council of Ministers and the country’s Presidency, made up of one member of each of the three constituent ethnic groups:
These are currently the Bosniak Bakir Izetbegović and the Bosnian Croat Željko Komšić from the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Bosnian Serb Nebojša Radmanović from the Republika Srpska.
Steinmeier with helpers from the Federal Agency for Technical Relief
After he had the chance on Monday evening to talk to some helpers from the Federal Agency for Technical Relief who are working in the flooded region in the north of Bosnia, on Tuesday (27 May) Foreign Minister Steinmeier is meeting representatives of Bosnian civil society for a working breakfast.
Since 2007 the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has been receiving financial support under the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance (IPA).
A total of 610 million euros were earmarked for this purpose over the period 2007-2013.
Germany is among the country’s most important trading partners and provides technical and financial assistance also in the context of regional development cooperation.
The German Government supports the prospect of European integration for all countries of the Western Balkans.
It welcomes the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia’s endeavours to forge closer ties with the European Union and supports the continuation of its reform efforts.
It calls on both sides to settle the dispute about the country’s name, also in the interest of progress towards greater integration with the EU.
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
Recognizing the progress the country had made in implementing the Ohrid Framework Agreement and the Stabilisation and Association Agreement, the European Council granted it candidate country status at its meeting on 15/16 December 2005.
In the context of the stabilization and association process the EU and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia had already been cooperating since the year 2000 .
Back in 1997, the then European Community (EC) and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia signed a Cooperation Agreement and an agreement on trade and transport aimed at fostering economic and political cooperation.
The country became a member of the United Nations under the designation “the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia”.
A visa facilitation agreement entered into force in December 2009, citizens of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia may visit the EU for tourist purposes for up to 90 days without needing a visa.
Europe Day, FYR Macedonia
Action Plan
A UN peacekeeper on duty
The purpose of the Action Plan is to anchor crisis prevention as a cross-sectoral political task at both government and civil society levels.
The current German Government is also committed to the networked security concept and the Action Plan and the structures created with it remain in place.
With the Action Plan, the German Government undertook to report to the German Bundestag every two years on its crisis prevention policy and the implementation of the Action Plan, with interim reports in the intervening years.
Basic tenets of the Action Plan
The prevention and resolution of crises are among the focuses of this policy.
The Bundeswehr is also a key instrument of German peace policy.
Civilian crisis prevention is a long-term undertaking.
The German Government laid down its principles on crisis prevention as early as April 2000 when it adopted its overall strategy “Civilian Crisis Prevention, Conflict Resolution and Post-Conflict Peace-Building”.
The Action Plan “Civilian Crisis Prevention, Conflict Resolution and Post-Conflict Peace-Building” adopted on 12 May 2004 forms the political frame of reference for the German Government’s crisis prevention policy.
The Action Plan is a programme in which the German Government commits itself to an ambitious crisis prevention policy.
At the same time, the Action Plan also acknowledges the special importance of civil society in crisis prevention.
Offers of cooperation to non-governmental players are therefore an essential part of the Action Plan.
The German Government is promoting civil society approaches to crisis prevention in many different ways.
The Interministerial Steering Group for Civilian Crisis Prevention and the Advisory Board for Civilian Crisis Prevention were established on the basis of the Action Plan.
The Subcommittee on Civilian Crisis Prevention and Networked Security came later.
National structures
The Action Plan
describes conflict structures and the resulting challenges facing the international community
creates national structures for crisis prevention
identifies specific fields of civilian peace policy in which the German Government should take action, for example
strengthening Germany’s contributions to multilateral initiatives
reconstructing state structures in crisis regions
promoting agents for peace in civil society
safeguarding the livelihoods of people in crisis regions
At the same time, it suggests ways of creating or developing institutions and instruments of crisis prevention and of using them more coherently than hitherto.
German foreign policy is a policy for peace.
Non-governmental organisations are often comparatively better placed than state players, as they frequently work at the grassroots level with direct access to communities in affected countries.
In addition to the Government, representatives of the legislature, civil society, academia and other institutions contributed to the drafting of the plan.
Kosovo is working to obtain diplomatic recognition from other states and to join international organisations.
Relations with countries in the region
The country has long had a special close relationship with Albania.
Within this framework, the parties have also reached agreements on matters such as implementing integrated border management and assigning liaison officers to each other’s capitals.
On 12 May 2004, the Federal Government adopted the interministerial Action Plan “Civilian Crisis Prevention, Conflict Resolution and Post-Conflict Peace-Building”.
The German Government’s crisis-prevention activities are pooled and coordinated by the Interministerial Steering Group for Civilian Crisis Prevention.
The Advisory Board for Civilian Crisis Prevention ensures that non-governmental stakeholders are involved in the sphere of civilian crisis prevention.
And the Center for International Peace Operations (ZIF) runs training and education programmes on behalf of the Federal Foreign Office for international peace operations and election observer missions.
The German Bundestag has had a Subcommittee on Civilian Crisis Prevention and Integrated Conflict Management since 2010, though this was renamed the Subcommittee on Civilian Crisis Prevention, Conflict Management and Integrated Action in 2014.
By conducting hearings with experts and maintaining dialogue with national and international stakeholders, it plays an important role in placing the subject in the spotlight.
The Subcommittee on Civilian Crisis Prevention, Conflict Management and Integrated Action makes a crucial contribution to integrating this subject matter into parliamentary activities.
The Subcommittee was constituted in March 2010 and held its first regular session on 19 April 2010.
The Interministerial Steering Group for Civilian Crisis Prevention collaborates closely with it.
Subcommittee on Civilian Crisis Prevention, Conflict Management and Integrated Action
Interministerial Steering Group for Civilian Crisis Prevention
The Interministerial Steering Group for Civilian Crisis Prevention has been in operation since September 2004.
Its chief task is to implement and monitor the Action Plan.
Headed by the Deputy Director-General responsible for Civilian Crisis Prevention at the Federal Foreign Office, the Steering Group is made up of civilian crisis prevention representatives from all Federal Ministries.
It exists first and foremost to provide information and coordinate operations.
In so doing, it creates the conditions for improving the German Government’s capacity to act in this policy area.
Alongside it, the experts from the various Ministries work in numerous interministerial bodies on the resolution of extreme emergencies.
Advisory Board for Civilian Crisis Prevention
From the outset, the German Government felt it very important that civil society participate closely in the cross-sectoral task of crisis prevention and peace-building.
The Advisory Board for Civilian Crisis Prevention, which was set up in accordance with the Action Plan, ensures that relevant non-governmental stakeholders are involved in the sphere of civilian crisis prevention.
The 19-member Advisory Board is intended to accompany the work of the Steering Group and provide it with specialist advice.
Members are drawn from the worlds of academia, security policy, development policy, human rights and humanitarian issues, the environment, the church, industry and political foundations, or they are policy advisors or figures with particular expertise in crisis prevention.
The Advisory Board was established in May 2005.
It also conducts academic analysis of international peace operations, supplies information products and advises the German Bundestag and Government.
Peace missions are one of the international community’s main instruments of conflict prevention and conflict management.
Alongside the United Nations, international peace operations are now also conducted by regional organisations like NATO, the EU, ECOWAS (West Africa) and the OSCE.
There are currently more than 9,975 civilian specialists and managers working in over 61 peace operations worldwide.
Building on the first United Nations peace operations of the late 1940s – the ‘blue helmet’ missions – they have developed into complex multidimensional undertakings.
It is key to the success of these missions that staff be experienced, well-prepared and socially competent experts.
The complex mandates of the operations mean that they are required to do challenging jobs involving counselling and management skills.
They also need to be extremely flexible, mobile and physically as well as mentally tough.
ZIF is organized as a non-profit company with the Federal Republic of Germany, represented by the Federal Foreign Office, as its sole shareholder.
Peace missions: the facts and figures PDF | 658 KB
Possible deployments in peace missions
Center for International Peace Operations (ZIF)
In Germany, the Center for International Peace Operations (ZIF) in Berlin is the implementing organisation of the Federal Foreign Office for recruiting, training, deploying, preparing, supervising and qualifying German specialists and managers for peace operations.
Now the agreement has to be formally concluded.
With the exception of Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, all countries in the region have now recognised the Republic of Kosovo and established diplomatic relations with it.
The first agreement between Serbia and Kosovo on normalising their relations of April 2013 was a major step towards establishing good-neighbourly relations.
Successes have already been achieved with respect to free movement of persons, recognition of higher education qualifications, integrated border management, civil and land registers, the free movement of goods and the representation of Kosovo in regional organisations.
Since declaring independence on 17 February 2008, the Republic of Kosovo has been recognised by 108 countries, including 23 of the 28 EU member states, the US, and its Balkan neighbours, excluding Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina (figures as of 20 May 2014).
In early May 2014, the negotiations on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) between the EU and Kosovo were concluded.
Kosovo also concluded a framework agreement with the European Investment Bank (EIB) in June 2013, on the basis of which the bank can finance projects in Kosovo.
Like all other Western Balkan countries, Kosovo was offered the prospect of joining the European Union by the European Council in Thessaloniki in 2003.
It successfully joined the World Bank Group and the International Monetary Fund in 2009. Another significant step was its accession to the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) in December 2012, as well as the Council of Europe Development Bank in June 2013.
Kosovo’s foreign policy focuses on the country’s progressive integration into Euro-Atlantic structures, i.e. the EU and NATO.
The Kosovar Government views the US and various large EU countries – Germany, France, Britain and Italy – as strategic partners offering long-term support in achieving this aim.
EU pre-accession support
This marks Kosovo’s first crucial step towards joining the EU.
The EU provides considerable financial support for the political and economic development of the country. For example, it made available some 71.4 million euros for 2013 under its Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance (IPA).
Since December 2008, the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX KOSOVO) has assisted the Kosovar authorities in creating a professional and multi-ethnic justice sector, police force and customs agencies. It currently has some 1200 international members of staff.
The agreement regulates the transformation of the so-called illegal parallel Serbian structures in the administration, justice system and police into Kosovar institutions.
This agreement, which has now been largely implemented, is the key outcome of the political dialogue between the two countries facilitated by Catherine Ashton, the EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy since October 2012. This process brings the Prime Ministers of the two countries together for regular meetings at which they seek to make progress on normalising relations between Belgrade and Pristina.
The European Commission’s Progress Report on Kosovo, 16 October 2013 (PDF, 667 KB)
More information on Kosovo’s progress towards the EU can be found on the European Commission website
The Federal Republic of Germany has already appealed to the Sudanese Government in Khartoum together with the Netherlands, the United Kingdom and the United States and has urged it to strictly observe the Sudan’s international commitments to comply with human rights, particularly the right to freedom of religion or belief and the right to life.
The Federal Government condemns all forms of torture and inhuman treatment.
The Sudan is obliged under international law to defend and promote religious freedom.
The proceedings are still ongoing. Under Sudanese law all death sentences must be confirmed by the Supreme Court.
Christoph Strässer, Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid and Member of the German Bundestag, issued the following statement today (27 May 2014) on the sentencing to death of the Sudanese woman Meriam Yehya Ibrahim:
The Sudanese Government has now acknowledged that the sentence may be flawed.
Council conclusions on the enlargement and stabilisation and association process, General Affairs Council meeting, 17 December 2013 (PDF, 137 KB)
Statement by Human Rights Commissioner Strässer on the sentencing to death of Sudanese woman Meriam Yehya Ibrahim
I am very concerned about the death sentence imposed on Meriam Yehya Ibrahim and am personally committed to working to save Ms Ibrahim’s life.
The Federal Foreign Office in Berlin has also urgently appealed to the Sudanese Embassy for the Sudan to observe human rights in the case of Ms Ibrahim.
The case has already been referred to a higher court, and I sincerely hope that a new verdict will be passed which complies with rule-of-law principles and reverses the death sentence.
I call upon the Sudan to refrain from either imposing the death penalty or carrying it out.
In the Sudan, Islam is the state religion, but the Sudanese constitution also provides for the observance of various other religions and the free practice of faith.
However, it also called on the Albanian Government to keep up its intensive efforts to fight corruption and organised crime.
Steinmeier pledges further assistance for flood victims
During his visit to Bosnia and Herzegovina Steinmeier expressed German and EU commitment to ensuring positive developments in the country.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier visited Bosnia and Herzegovina from 26 to 27 May for talks.
In Sarajevo he met representatives from Government and civil society.
During his visit, the German Foreign Minister expressed the continued intensive commitment of both Germany and the EU to ensuring positive developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier pledged seven million euros of assistance for victims of the disastrous flooding.
Five million euros of reconstruction assistance
Continuous heavy rains have flooded whole swathes of land in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Electricity and drinking water supplies have been interrupted and bridges destroyed, so that some villages are completely cut off.
In his speech, Foreign Minister Steinmeier called the flooding an “unprecedented disaster”.
As a first step, the Federal Government had already made one million euros of emergency aid available to the Federal Agency for Technical Relief and humanitarian agencies last week.
Now the Foreign Minister announced further support for the Bosnian population:
The money is intended to go to individuals and small businesses in particular, to help with the reconstruction of destroyed homes and companies.
Moreover, the German Government would make an additional one million euros available for the removal of mines and dangerous munitions from the war in Bosnia that have been washed up, said Steinmeier.
The Federal Foreign Office has been engaged in humanitarian demining efforts in Bosnia since 1997.
Therefore Germany is making a total of nearly 7 million euros available for the victims of the disastrous flooding.
undertake a great reform. This was something which the European Union wanted to guide and support with the so-called Compact for Growth, said the Foreign Minister, emphasising:
look at the people, they are standing together and tackling things in a courageous manner at this crucial time – draw on this strength and solidarity when you undertake your task of reform!
Nonetheless, according to Steinmeier one did notice that certain neighbouring countries had made faster progress towards Europe – in order to “catch up” courageous reforms in Bosnia and Herzegovina were urgently needed, he said.
On Monday afternoon, Steinmeier also met the Chairman of the Council of Ministers and the country’s Presidency, made up of one member of each of the three constituent ethnic groups:
Steinmeier with helpers from the Federal Agency for Technical Relief
After he had the chance on Monday evening to talk to some helpers from the Federal Agency for Technical Relief who are working in the flooded region in the north of Bosnia, on Tuesday (27 May) Foreign Minister Steinmeier met representatives of Bosnian civil society for a working breakfast.
With them, Steinmeier discussed the country’s future and its reform potential, as well as the role of the international community.
Civil society plays a particular role in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the context of the need to reform.
Following the demonstrations in February, citizens’ forums had been set up, although they themselves state that they are not pursuing any political agenda.
Visit to the automotive parts supplier Veritas
Afterwards the Foreign Minister visited the German automotive parts supplier Veritas, which has operated a plant in a Sarajevo suburb since 2011.
The Foreign Minister was welcomed by Horst Eisenacher, German CEO of Veritas, and Ervin Berbic, Factory Manager.
The two men then gave Steinmeier a tour of the large factory workshop and explained how the production of automobile parts took place there.
Political and administrative reform and an effective campaign against corruption in the country will nonetheless be crucial for further German investment, as Steinmeier pointed out during his visit.
for the UNEP magazine “Our Planet”
What do we, as the human race, see as the future we want?
That, however, requires a fundamental rethink, because we cannot live and work as if the resources of our environment were inexhaustible.
something which is in fact very compatible with increasing prosperity.
We cannot avoid thinking about economic performance and the protection of living environments together and indeed bringing them together, because their relationship is symbiotic.
We agree that our existing economy needs to be developed into a “green economy”.
In a concrete sense, this means above all investing in renewable energy, boosting resource efficiency in production and consumption and establishing effective plans for the protection and exploitation of forests and oceans.
For this, we need strong and capable international organisations
Experience has shown us that we make the best progress in sustainable development when we define clear and universally valid rules.
An impressive example of this is the 1987 Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer.
For instance, until the 90s it was normal for ozone-damaging CFCs to be used in fridges.
Since then the global production and use of such chemicals has been reduced by 97%.
This determined action is now bearing fruit, as the latest research shows that the ozone layer is slowly starting to recover.
It also provides for economic incentives to preserve biodiversity in countries of origin.
Here in Germany and also amongst EU member states we take this very seriously.
This is evident, for instance, in the three national targets which we aim to meet by 2050.
Germany’s shift to green energy will show that it is not only possible but indeed economically beneficial to decouple economic growth from energy consumption.
2015 will be an important year in setting the course for the future, with the UN Climate Change Conference in Paris and the UN summit on the Post-2015 Agenda in New York.
In terms of content I consider there to be four main strategy areas – combating poverty and hunger, protecting natural resources and using them sustainably, creating jobs with adequate pay through sustainable, environmentally-friendly growth and finally good governance.
Germany therefore supports a new global partnership as proposed last year by the High Level Panel of eminent persons on the Post-2015 Development Agenda.
Such a partnership must include business, science and society in equal measure.
Bundesrepublik Deutschland 	May 2014
What can and what must we do today, to ensure that we really are moving in the direction we want?
These questions are relevant to all of us, in all regions of the world.
We all want peace, security and prosperity – both today and tomorrow.
Planetary boundaries exist and we cannot exceed them if we want to avoid diminishing the resources younger and future generations need to live their lives.
Only recently, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) reiterated just how vulnerable humans and nature are to the effects of unchecked climate change.
Therefore we must finally make the shift to climate-friendly development,
It is not a question of limiting economic development in the poorest regions of the world.
On the contrary, many new development prospects need to be opened up to them.
This can succeed if around the world we learn how to generate prosperity differently from how we do today.
Despite all the encouraging progress of recent years, around 1.2 billion people worldwide still suffer abject poverty.
In view of this, it is very tempting to strive solely for quantitative growth whilst disregarding the limits set by nature in terms of water, land, raw materials and biodiversity.
Yet an increasing depletion of resources vital for people’s livelihoods would inevitably undermine long-term development prospects, exacerbate hunger and poverty and, as a result of this, increase the risk of conflicts.
Security and stability, on the other hand, are vital prerequisites for developing successful economies.
The key is therefore sustainable development.
The international community reiterated its commitment to this at the 2012 United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development in Rio de Janeiro.
The establishment of the United Nations Environment Assembly (UNEA) is a visible sign of this enhanced status.
For the first time, all 193 members of the United Nations will debate and make decisions on global challenges together.
I see this as a great opportunity for us to reach a joint consensual understanding on what needs to be done in the coming years and on how it can be achieved.
A further example is the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit Sharing, which regulates access to genetic resources, such as medicinal plants, and aims to fairly share the benefits of their use between countries of origin and of consumption.
Funding is a key factor in the global protection of biodiversity.
Joint action in no way diminishes national and local obligations,
everyone must assume responsibility to the extent that their circumstances permit.
By then, we want to reduce our greenhouse gas emissions by 80 to 95% compared to 1990 levels. We want 80% of our electricity to come from renewable energy – above all wind and solar – and we want to reduce our primary energy consumption by 50%.
Germany is working to facilitate the adoption of a legally binding climate change agreement, with the participation of all states, which would enter into force in 2020.
In our view, it must include ambitious goals, fair rules for more transparency, should initiate cooperation between industrial and developing countries, boost investment in climate protection in all parts of the world whilst at the same time taking into consideration legitimate interests when it comes to adjustment and the protection against risk.
We are also striving to incorporate ambitious goals which apply to all states into the Post-2015 Development Agenda.
Each country will be responsible for implementing the goals but support will be available in the form of international monitoring.
Shared goals are contingent upon joint understanding for sustainable development.
A path of sustainable development which benefits everyone requires us to go the extra mile time and again and to think not only about what is happening today, but also about what tomorrow will bring.
If we succeed in doing this then I am sure we will succeed in building the future we want.
and so it was very important that Rio 2012 succeeded in boosting UNEP’s clout as a voice of international environmental protection, thus enabling it to make itself heard in the long term.
That is why Germany is standing by its pledge to make an annual sum of 500 million euros available for this.
The EU Commission considers seven of the twelve key criteria to have been met and is providing Albania with high-level support to fulfil the remaining five.
Energy policy in light of the Ukraine crisis
Albania applied to join the EU in 2009.
But before accession negotiations can be launched, the criteria set by the European Commission in 2010 must be met.
Like all other Western Balkan countries, Albania was offered the prospect of joining the European Union by the European Council in Thessaloniki in 2003.
As the European Council reiterated in 2006, a country’s progress towards this goal depends on its efforts to meet the stipulated accession criteria.
Albania officially applied to join the EU in 2009.
Milestones in relations between the EU and Albania
After decades of isolation, Albania started to show an interest in Europe in the early 1990s.
The EU (then still the EC) established relations with Albania in June 1991, following the creation of a parliamentary republic in March that year.
A Trade and Cooperation Agreement between the EU and Albania entered into force in 1992.
The Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) between Albania and the EU was signed in 2006 and entered into force on 1 April 2009.
Under the terms of the SAA, support is being provided on matters such as consolidating political stability in Albania, establishing a functioning market economy as rapidly as possible and promoting regional cooperation.
The EU membership application and the necessary reforms
Albania’s steps towards the EU
On 28 April 2009, Albania submitted its application for membership of the European Union.
The Council of the European Union welcomed the application in November 2009 and asked the European Commission to submit an opinion on it.
In the Commission’s Opinion of December 2010, it stated that Albania had to meet the necessary criteria before accession negotiations could be opened, and that it had, in particular, to meet the twelve key criteria specified in the Opinion.
In its Progress Report of October 2013 the European Commission acknowledged that these criteria had been met and recommended that Albania be granted candidate country status.
In its conclusions of 16 December 2013, the General Affairs Council held out the prospect of candidate country status being granted to Albania in June 2014.
Before that can happen, however, the EU Commission must submit a report on the progress made by Albania in implementing reforms in the judiciary system and in combating corruption and organised crime.
European Commission Progress Report on Albania, 16 October 2013
EU support for Albania
The EU provides financial support for the reform process through the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance (IPA).
A total of around 594 million euros were earmarked for this purpose over the period 2007-2013.
More information on Albania’s progress towards the EU can be found on the European Commission website
After the flood disaster:
Steinmeier visits Sarajevo
At the Energy Security Summit in Berlin on 28 May, Foreign Minister Steinmeier spoke about how energy policy and foreign-affairs challenges are intertwined.
Speaking at the Energy Security Summit in Berlin on Wednesday (28 May), Foreign Minister Steinmeier described how energy policy and foreign-affairs challenges are intertwined.
With his visit he reaffirmed Germany’s and the EU’s continued strong commitment to a good future for the country.
“Energieaußenpolitik [energy-related foreign policy]” may be a long word, Steinmeier said, “but the point is that it’s one word.”
For the flood victims Steinmeier pledged seven million euros in assistance.
The core importance of energy policy to foreign and security affairs is something Foreign Minister Steinmeier already emphasised during his first term in office.
The floods are an absolute catastrophe, I feel concern and sympathy for everyone affected.
Organised by the Munich Security Conference and the Frankfurter Allgemeine Forum, the conference chiefly focused on the US shale-gas revolution and – in light of recent events – the possibility that the Ukraine crisis may constitute a turning point in European energy policy.
And let me assure you that all my fellow Germans feel the same.
The role of energy supply in the Ukraine conflict
This brings Germany’s assistance for the flood victims to seven million euros in total.
I’m pleased to be able to tell you that the German Government has agreed to provide five million euros in emergency aid.
Negotiations are currently under way between Russia and Ukraine about the continuation of supply and billions in back payments.
“Whether the conflict can be defused will in part depend on energy policy,” Steinmeier said, speaking to an audience of high-level decision-makers from the fields of politics, trade, industry and research.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and Wolfgang Ischinger
This week, European Commissioner Günther Oettinger is also negotiating with representatives of Russia and Ukraine in Berlin to try and find a compromise.
The German Foreign Minister thanked Oettinger for his negotiation efforts,
saying that swift agreement could prevent “additional pressures impeding the resolution of the political conflict”.
He therefore urged that the “existing opportunity for agreement should now be grasped”.
Bosniaks, Croats and Serbs.
Steinmeier also expressed his particular gratitude to Ambassador Wolfgang Ischinger, Chair of the Munich Security Conference, for his dedicated work as the OSCE’s special representative in Ukraine.
In his speech, Steinmeier commended Ischinger for having “helped to build bridges” in the context of the roundtables in Ukraine.
Germany is the country’s number one trading partner.
Ukraine’s Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk was also expected to speak on Wednesday evening, to close the conference with his view of the current political situation in Ukraine following the presidential elections.
Developments in European energy policy
Steinmeier declared that “diversification at three different levels” was essential for energy supply in Europe to keep functioning well.
He was referring to energy sources, supplier countries and supply routes.
At the moment, he said, around half of Russian gas supplies destined for Europe passed through Ukrainian territory.
Steinmeier at the 2014 Energy Security Summit
In the Baltic region and the Visegrad countries (Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic and Slovakia), Russian gas makes up a large proportion of energy supply – in some cases even 100%.
In future, Steinmeier said, no country should be “dependent on one single supplier”.
That said, he nonetheless concluded that restructuring and diversifying energy supply would be a medium and long-term process.
I’m convinced there are many people in Bosnia and Herzegovina who realise it’s now time for courageous decisions.
Steinmeier shares joint patronage of the Energy Security Summit with Sigmar Gabriel, Federal Minister for Economic Affairs and Energy.
Steinmeier talking about energy policy in foreign affairs
Reporting from a number of visits and talks in other EU countries, Steinmeier said that, while it was true that Russia itself had an interest in not casting doubt on the reliability of supply, “higher levels of dependence on Russian gas do tend to translate into higher levels of political anxiety”.
Click here to visit the homepage of the Energy Security Summit.
Continued support for Lebanon
The Foreign Minister’s talks in Beirut: a focus on Lebanon’s stability and support for the country in view of pressures caused by the war in neighbouring Syria.
Germany has to import more than 95 per cent of its oil and around 90 per cent of its natural gas.
Steinmeier expresses his sympathy for those affected:
The German Foreign Minister announces substantial support for the Bosnian population:
The same evening Steinmeier has the opportunity to talk to members of Germany’s technical relief team working in the flooded areas.
During his visit Steinmeier also calls in at the factory of a German car parts supplier.
Also in his joint press conference with his Bosnian counterpart Lagumdžija Steinmeier highlights the need for reform.
The way people helped each other during the flood disaster shows that the country’s political elites still have to pass a stiff test:
Text Japan film:
Foreign Minister Steinmeier visited Bosnia and Herzegovina from 26 to 27 May.
As Foreign Minister Steinmeier touches down in Sarajevo, the sun is shining – a marked contrast to the scenes reaching Germany of catastrophic flooding further north.
Yet even here planes laden with aid for the flood victims underscore how devastating the floods have been.
With his visit the German Foreign Minister wants to highlight Germany’s and the EU’s continued commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
His very first engagement – the opening of a Bosnian business forum – begins with a minute’s silence for the victims.
The floods in Bosnia and Herzegovina have not only wreaked destruction, however – they’ve also shown that in the urge to help each other, people can overcome ethnic divisions.
In this multi-ethnic and multi-religious country three communities live side by side:
The country’s presidency, too, is composed of representatives of each of its three communities.
With them Steinmeier discusses how the country can draw closer to the EU and the reforms this will entail.
For Bosnia and Herzegovina is not just to receive post-flooding reconstruction aid:
Germany and the EU also want to help it implement reforms – in the area of economic development, for example.
Here car parts are made for Germany’s car industry – a successful example of German investment in the country.
The country’s efforts to forge closer links with the EU have stalled, he points out – so bold reform steps are now urgently needed.
Wholesale reforms, for which Germany and the EU pledge intensive backing.
His talks are set to focus on matters surrounding Lebanon’s political and economic stability as well as continuing support for the country in view of the pressures caused by the war in neighbouring Syria.
“Apart from anything else, the frequency of our meetings shows how close a friendship there is between our two countries.”
The focus this time was once again on Lebanon’s increasingly difficult situation as a neighbour to Syria and one of the main countries accepting Syrian refugees.
German-Lebanese bilateral relations
Germany increases assistance for Syrian refugees by five million euros
It was important, he said, to “make use of instruments like trust funds to stabilise the situation in Lebanon”.
Refugee numbers have kept rising over each of the last three years. In that time, Germany has provided around 100 million euros in aid.
We agreed today that we would make another five million euros available for humanitarian assistance and medical care for refugees.
Steinmeier emphasised his wish to work on “persuading another couple of countries to take in refugees”.
a humanitarian disaster crying out for action
Syrian refugees in the tent city at Barr Elias, Lebanon
Steinmeier furthermore intends to use his time in Lebanon to gain a direct impression of the situation facing Syrian refugees.
Steinmeier made the circumstances clear before heading off on his trip:
Supporting Lebanon’s stability
“With more than 150,000 dead and over 9 million refugees on Europe’s doorstep, we need to act.”
According to United Nations figures, 9.3 million people in Syria are dependent on humanitarian assistance, more than 7.6 million of them internally displaced.
A visit to a refugee camp in the Bekaa Valley is therefore planned for Friday (30 May).
Lebanon has taken in more than a million registered refugees.
Press conference given by Foreign Ministers Bassil and Steinmeier in Beirut
Foreign Minister Steinmeier arrived in Beirut, the Lebanese capital, on 29 May.
Frequent talks – close friendship
Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Bassil in conversation in Beirut
Directly after arriving in Beirut, Foreign Minister Steinmeier met his Lebanese counterpart Gebran Bassil.
Federal Foreign Minister Steinmeier commented as follows:
On top of that, the UN High Commissioner for Refugees reports that 2.7 million refugees have sought shelter in neighbouring countries.
After his talks with Foreign Minister Bassil, Steinmeier underlined the need for further international assistance, for example from the World Bank, in view of the “incredible pressures” Lebanon was facing.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier announced that Germany would be making an additional contribution to help with the floods of refugees:
While there, the foreign minister will also meet for dialogue with Ninette Kelley, head of the UNHCR in Lebanon.
Minister of State Roth in Sofia Michael Roth, Minister of State for Europe, travelled to Bulgaria on 27 May to gain an impression of the progress made on the country’s reforms.
Following talks with some of the countries’ leading politicians, he also met representatives of civil society and the media.
Strengthening the rule of law and civil society:
Minister of State Roth in Sofia
Minister of State Roth in discussion at Tarabya Cultural Adademy
Minister of State for Europe Michael Roth held talks on 27 May with Bulgaria’s President Rosen Plevneliev, Foreign Minister Kristian Vigenin and Deputy Foreign Minister Todor Churov.
During the trip, Minister of State Roth also met representatives of the Bulgarian parliament as well as civil society and the media.
The term shale gas revolution emerged just a few years ago – initially in business newspapers and then ever more frequently in political debates. It aroused great hopes.
Bulgaria’s Foreign Minister welcoming Minister of State Roth
The focus was on how energy prices, competitive advantages and ultimately also the political balance of power would shift around the world.
Strengthening cooperation with the Gulf states
On the final stage of his trip to the Arab world, Foreign Minister Steinmeier today held talks in Qatar.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier arriving in Doha
Then Steinmeier met his counterpart, Qatari Foreign Minister Khalid Al Attiyah.
The focus of the visit was on the state of the reforms under way in Bulgaria to strengthen democracy and the rule of law and combat organised crime and corruption.
Bilateral relations and regional trouble spots
Steinmeier with Emir Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani
When it joined the EU in 2007, Bulgaria committed itself to making significant progress in these areas in the context of the Cooperation and Verification Mechanism.
Minister of State Roth emphasised while in Sofia that the Bulgarian Government still had considerable efforts to make in order to recoup the remaining deficits.
Roth identified his conversations with representatives of Bulgaria’s civil society and media as a particularly important part of his visit.
He commented as follows:
I am profoundly impressed by the vitality and lively criticism in evidence in Bulgaria’s civil society.
However, this discussion was always a bit remote – at least with regard to its impact on us in Germany.
Steinmeier and his Qatari counterpart Al Attiyah
Today's meeting focused on German-Qatari relations and the situation in Syria and Egypt.
It is carried on the shoulders of increasing numbers of courageous individuals working for Bulgaria’s continuing integration into the European community of values.
The energy self-sufficiency of the US, new sources of supply for Europe, relocations of production in industry, the effects on the transformation of Germany’s energy system – these seemed to be medium or long-term developments.
Since a few weeks ago, however, energy security is no longer an issue in the short term, never mind the medium or long term.
The refugee issue could only really be resolved, he went on, “if we devote ourselves to finding a political solution to the conflict”.
An independent and critical media is an essential prerequisite for high levels of engagement in civil society.
The two men also discussed the working conditions for foreign workers involved in preparing for the World Cup in Qatar.
He could only encourage the country to continue along this path, he said.
Inauguration of the new PASCH school in Doha
In the afternoon, Foreign Minister Steinmeier then visited a German-Qatari education project:
The inauguration took place on the school premises in Doha.
PASCH stands for the “Schools: Partners for the Future” initiative.
Visit to Lebanon (30 May)
Talks in the United Arab Emirates (31 May)
What provoked bemused head-scratching or shoulder-shrugging ten years ago, has become tangible in the Ukraine crisis:
The Government and the parliament have a duty to guarantee the freedom and independence of the media, by ensuring, for example, that reliable press laws are in place.
In his talks the Minister of State noted the readiness of his interlocutors to hold frank talks about highly topical subjects such as freedom of the media, the rule of law and the independence of the judiciary.
Lively dialogue with civil society
And whether we want it or not: the EU – all of us – are affected.
For around half of Russian gas supplies destined for Europe still pass through Ukraine.
And higher levels of dependence on Russian gas in some countries do tend to translate into higher levels of political anxiety there.
This was very apparent during my visit to the Baltic region, as well Hungary and other Visegrad states, which receive 100 per cent of their gas supplies from Russia.
That’s why the political concern about Russia’s annexation of Crimea combined with dependence on energy from Russia has had a very dramatic impact on many of our eastern EU neighbours.
Revolutions are rare, especially in the sphere of energy policy.
And evolutionary changes – regardless of whether they are prompted by the desire for lesser dependence or a reduction in CO2 emissions – need time.
However, the emphasis here is on “one day”.
For even if an issue suddenly becomes politically urgent, this won’t speed up technological or regulatory developments.
Although everyone knows that we need more diversification, that we need new supply systems, that we have to invest much more – and this applies to Europe as a whole – in energy efficiency, although many want to leave fossil fuel behind and focus more on renewable energy, that cannot be achieved overnight.
Abu Dhabi:
At any rate, shale gas won’t help us to resolve the acute crisis, certainly not everywhere, when we consider densely populated regions in Germany and the Netherlands.
However, markets and prices around the world will of course be influenced by the increased supply.
Naturally, that also influences energy policy strategies in Europe – and I’m therefore interested to see what ideas this conference and your discussions produce.
If the link between the foreign policy crisis and the energy supply is as close as I’ve described it, then it cannot be a coincidence, Wolfgang Ischinger, that we’re meeting again today.
If someone were to look at the list of telephone conversations I’ve had during the last two weeks, then they would say: wow, Steinmeier really has prepared well for this conference.
He spoke with today’s host nearly every day on the phone!
This national dialogue is crucial to Ukraine’s future.
Alongside ways of strengthening bilateral relations, Syria and Iran were also on the agenda.
that isn’t the task of a round table.
The round table isn’t the UN Security Council.
Wolfgang, the fact that these bridges are being built is due in no small part to your efforts.
That the atmosphere of the debate has changed a little.
Heavy schedule for talks in Istanbul
This made a substantial contribution not only towards ensuring that the elections could take place last Sunday but that, above all, this election day went off without any major bloodshed and that the outcome was clear.
I therefore want to express my personal thanks to you, Wolfgang, for the part you’ve played during the last few weeks in helping to bring about this step forward.
I said that energy policy will play a role in determining whether we can defuse the Ukraine crisis in the short term and I therefore welcome the fact that you, Mr Oettinger, have been conducting intensive talks with the Russian and Ukrainian energy ministers since early May.
I’m certain that even if there are now delays, there is no alternative to what Oettinger and his colleagues from Ukraine and Russia have discussed.
I want to urge everyone involved to reach a provisional understanding on gas supplies to Ukraine to prevent Ukraine’s energy supply exerting additional pressure and thus impeding the resolution of the political conflict.
Discussion about accession talks
I therefore hope that this will succeed and say so in awareness that even during the Cold War we managed over many decades to keep energy supplies out of the major conflicts between the political systems.
The German foreign minister’s visit to the United Arab Emirates centred around strengthening bilateral cooperation as well as such regional issues as the Iranian nuclear programme and the war in Syria.
Frank-Walter Steinmeier will be engaged in talks in the Arab region from 29 May until 1 June.
The Minister of State met, for instance, with pupils of Istanbul Lisesi, a secondary school with a German department.
Afterwards he had a discussion with scholarship-holders of Tarabya Cultural Academy.
When I talk of concerns about energy dependency, then – in light of the current crisis – I’m talking about Ukraine.
However, it’s equally important that we talk about the EU and Germany.
That means that not only in Ukraine but also here in Germany, energy security is an essential goal of foreign policy.
How can we achieve this aim?
In its recent history, Europe has successfully mastered crises by moving closer together.
After visiting Lebanon, the foreign minister travelled onwards to the Persian Gulf on Friday evening.
Click here for more information on the talks in Beirut.
In the United Arab Emirates and in Qatar, Steinmeier engaged in political talks and met representatives of civil society.
Georgia hands over looted art to Foreign Minister Steinmeier
boosting political dialogue
On Monday, 2 June 2014 at 6 p.m., Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier will receive from Georgian Prime Minister Irakli Garibashvili two books removed from Germany during the Second World War.
The artefacts are being returned during a ceremony in the Bode Museum honouring cooperation projects between Georgia and the Prussian Cultural Heritage Foundation.
After several years of work on the part of the Federal Foreign Office, the Georgian Government has now smoothed the way for the return of these stocks.
A date for the handover of the rest of the books has not yet been fixed.
Separate from visits by foreign ministers, it will be a forum for dialogue on matters we are concerned about and areas where we see potential for future development.
The talks also focused on the situation in Syria.
In addition to European subjects his programme focused on dialogue with civil society.
The next stops were Istanbul Bilgi University, where Minister of State Roth gave an address and talked with students about current political affairs, and a visit to the German Protestant community in Turkey.
Steinmeier said they had agreed to work together with a view to improving the humanitarian situation.
Another regional topic on the agenda concerned the negotiations on the Iranian nuclear programme.
They were discovered in the University Library in Tbilisi in 2006 among up to 70,000 books of German provenance removed during the war.
The handover in the Bode Museum is the symbolic prelude to the return of the entire collection.
Shortly after he accompanied Federal President Gauck on his visit to Turkey, Minister of State Roth has again visited the country.
Shortly after he accompanied Federal President Gauck on his visit to Turkey, Michael Roth, Minister of State for Europe at the Federal Foreign Office, has again visited the country.
Minister of State Roth with Turkish Deputy Prime Minister Ali Babacan (far right of the picture)
Michael Roth discussed the state of the country’s EU accession talks with representatives of the Turkish Government, among others with Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoğlu and Minister of European Union Affairs Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu.
He also had lunch with Deputy Prime Minister Ali Babacan.
Minister of State Roth with students of Istanbul Bilgi University
Another key aspect of the trip were a number of meetings with representatives of Turkey’s vibrant and diverse civil society.
Germany’s bilateral relations with Turkey
Together with his fellow foreign minister, Steinmeier also emphasised the quality of economic relations, saying they were characterised by “very large numbers of close ties”.
Another subject in Abu Dhabi was cultural and academic cooperation.
Strengthening cultural and academic cooperation
At a joint press conference, Steinmeier said he had reported to his colleague about his visit to Lebanon and about the pitiful situation of the Syrian refugees there.
Like other endeavours, we can only succeed in ending the bloodshed in Syria if the regional powers are involved.
Further talks in Qatar
On Saturday evening (31 May), Steinmeier left for Doha.
Before that, he had held talks in the United Arab Emirates.
In the morning the German Foreign Minister first met the country's Prime Minister, Sheikh Abdullah bin Nasser bin Khalifa Al Thani, and the Emir, Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani.
Following the resignation of UN envoy Brahimi, every effort must now be made, the Minister continued, to find a suitable successor and give the new mediator a new mandate.
So during his time in Doha Foreign Minister Steinmeier also talked with the Qatari Minister of Economy and Commerce, Sheikh Ahmed bin Jassim bin Mohamed Al Thani.
They not only discussed further strengthening economic exchange and investment, but also looked at current economic issues such as preparations for the 2022 World Cup in Qatar.
the German Foreign Minister presented a plaque to Tariq bin Ziad Independent Secondary School for Boys denoting it as a PASCH school.
It links schools throughout the world which attach particular importance to teaching the German language.
At the outset of the 2013/14 academic year, on the initiative of the German Embassy in Doha, the Qatari Ministry of Education identified the Tariq bin Ziad Independent Secondary School for Boys as a model school for the introduction of German.
However, we mustn’t misunderstand this as the return to a nationalised energy industry and the creation of cartels.
What we need is the completion of the internal energy market.
The European Commission will present us with proposals on this today and I would be all for us setting to work as quickly as possible.
That will be followed by an appointment with his opposite number in Qatar, Khalid Al Attiyah.
Steinmeier previously met Al Attiyah when the latter paid a first official visit to Berlin on 28 March.
The March meeting focused on the conflicts in the Middle East and Syria, alongside matters of economic cooperation.
Bilateral relations with the United Arab Emirates
There should be no more corners of the EU which are not or are only inadequately connected to the pipeline network in the single market.
And the time has also come for a debate without taboos on whether the market can do all this or whether we have to rethink our financing models in Europe and provide public funds.
I’m certain that institutions such as the European Investment Bank (EIB) can also help here.
Think of the Baltic region, where – to all intents and purposes – there is no gas link with the EU with the possibility of supply in both directions.
That’s why the concerns about dependency are especially strong there.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier arrived in Beirut on 29 May.
His visit focused on Lebanon’s stability and support for the country in view of pressures caused by the war in neighbouring Syria.
Lebanon was his first stop on a trip around the Arab region.
His talks focused on matters surrounding Lebanon’s political and economic stability as well as continuing support for the country in view of the pressures caused by the war in neighbouring Syria.
If gas can flow without any problems within the entire single market from one country to another, then the concerns in the Baltic region will diminish considerably.
Overview –
Steinmeier pledged an additional five million euros in German support for Syrian refugees.
Steinmeier and Bassil
The two foreign ministers came together relatively recently – in early May – for their first talks in Berlin, and have now met again in Beirut.
Ash urges Germany to “revitalise Europe”,
One question is certainly disputed in this debate, namely whether Germany should go its own way when its political beliefs diverge from those of its European allies.
Chinese writer Feng Zhongping considers a united Europe which actively participates in world affairs to be of fundamental importance, and Germany’s role within this to be essential:
And the fact that we’re still not able to create a genuine European single market for electricity, for instance due to the lack of interconnectors, really is an anachronism we have to address.
The second is diversification – diversification at three different levels: diversification of sources of energy, of suppliers and of supply routes.
Germany increases assistance for Syrian refugees
There’s a basic principle in the world of diplomacy: never put all your eggs in one basket.
And that also applies to countries which supply us with fossil fuels.
a humanitarian disaster crying out for action
We therefore have to understand that, of course, diversification on the supplier side – for example, to Asia – is also a smart policy!
And the shale gas revolution will play a part in this.
I’m not sure whether we’ve sufficiently discussed or understood the geological, environmental or geopolitical consequences of this development.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier with Ninette Kelley, UNHCR representative in Lebanon
Steinmeier furthermore used his time in Lebanon to gain a direct impression of the situation facing Syrian refugees.
To that end, he visited a refugee camp in the Bekaa Valley on Friday (30 May).
In many branches today, energy costs are what labour costs were in the nineties: the critical cost factor.
Today wages account for only a quarter of industrial costs.
While there, the foreign minister also met for dialogue with Ninette Kelley, head of the UNHCR in Lebanon.
Afterwards, the foreign minister travelled onwards to visit the refugee encampments at Barr Elias.
Several hundred Syrian families are living here in a collection of makeshift tents.
The aid organisation World Vision is operating at Barr Elias alongside the UNHCR,
Energy and raw materials, on the other hand, make up 40 per cent, even up to two thirds in energy-intensive branches.
enabling refugee children to attend school classes. One of the lesson provided is English,
The energy self-sufficiency of, for example, the US, has broadened its scope for action in the foreign policy field.
Some say that the US will lose interest in the Middle East.
Everyone can work out for themselves what that would mean for the security architecture in this region.
and Steinmeier saw what skills they had already acquired in conversation with the very youngest:
from the shy to the cheeky, all of them introduced themselves to the foreign minister and even asked him his name in return.
The US is directing a considerable portion of its attention to the Asia-Pacific region, which will import almost 90 per cent of its energy from the Middle East.
The Chinese and Indian economies will not only be among the largest consumers.
We can be sure that the political engagement of these powers in the region will grow accordingly and that both will become our direct rivals for energy resources.
The message of the shale gas revolution for Europe is double-edged for another reason:
Steinmeier at the Barr Elias refugee camp
The enormity of the challenges facing Lebanon was something he intended to get across during his afternoon meeting with Prime Minister Tammam Salam.
Alongside the financial crisis, the most important political challenges within this process include policy on China and Russia.
Germany’s humanitarian support for Lebanon took a more tangible form that afternoon. In the courtyard of the German Embassy,
Should Europe fail to present a united front on these issues, there was a risk that member states would be played off against each other by China and Russia, according to Grant, Godement and Heilmann.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and a representative of the German Red Cross handed over several ambulances to the Lebanese Red Cross.
Creating stability in the European neighbourhood was also seen as an absolutely crucial challenge.
firstly, the supply possibilities will widen in the medium term, and energy security could increase as a result.
On the other hand, we – especially here in Germany – have to face up to an uncomfortable truth:
At the end of his visit to Beirut, Steinmeier went to speak to soldiers in the German naval contingent which is there as part of the UNIFIL mission.
it’s foreseeable that the shale gas revolution will prolong the fossil age.
They primarily told the German foreign minister about the current situation for UNIFIL off the coast of Lebanon.
After his visit to Lebanon, Foreign Minister Steinmeier was to continue with his talks in the Arab region until Sunday (1 June).
The fight against climate change should encourage us to prevent the world from seeing the shale gas revolution and the shift to green energy as alternatives.
This saw him travel on to the United Arab Emirates and Qatar.
It’s not a case of either a switch to new technologies in energy policy or the extraction of shale gas. For I believe the switch to new technologies in the energy supply is unavoidable, at least if we want to prevent things getting worse.
That gas and power generated from gas will have to play a role in future is, in my opinion, likewise beyond doubt.
Foreign policy will have to continue playing its part.
You can see that “Energieaußenpolitik” (energy-related foreign policy) may be a long word, but the point is that it’s one word.
Of course, energy policy within the context of foreign affairs cannot compensate for shortcomings in national energy policies.
That wasn’t the case eight years ago.
When I left the stage after the speech, Horst Teltschik – your predecessor, Wolfgang – said,
“Mr Steinmeier, that really was an interesting speech.
It’s just a pity you didn’t talk about foreign policy.”
That wouldn’t happen today!
Today we think differently.
Nonetheless, voices from outside commenting on Germany’s 2014 foreign policy review are speaking a distinctly pro-European language.
Without Germany providing Europe with strong leadership as a key “power-broker” (Slaughter), there was, according to some, a risk of the integration process losing momentum and Europe failing in the face of its significant challenges.
debate on Europe within Review 2014
The results of the European Parliament elections clearly demonstrated that Euroscepticism has risen in nearly all EU member states.
whilst German commentators, such as Schwarzer, are more self-effacing:
“Germany’s highest priority was and remains to hold the eurozone together.” According to Tocci and Grant however, Germany’s European policy is shaped by short-term interests and lacks sufficient will to play a key strategic role.
“However one is to define the centre of the EU – as the Franco-German axis, the Weimar Triangle or the interplay of Berlin, Paris and London – none of these models of the decision-making centre of the EU is possible without including Germany,” as Münkler put it.
Whilst Ash, Friedman, Grant and Arber strongly criticise Germany’s decision to abstain from the Libya resolution at the UN Security Council, German peace researchers, such as Müller, and many Asian writers, praise Germany’s foreign policy restraint, as shown in this case.
“Germany needs to have the courage to forge a pioneer group within the EU, further deepening the integration process within and meanwhile forming common positions and actions on international issues. [… ] The only realist approach would be allowing some countries to go first, the rest could catch up later on if they want.”
Whilst the crisis in Crimea and the treatment of Russia were perceived to reflect global conflict configurations (something articulated particularly clearly by Mearsheimer) and thus evoked very different opinions – ranging as far as Tocci, Keyman and Schwarzer’s view that the EU enlargement policy should be revamped –, Münkler, Stein and Tempel thought that the south should be supported by means of a preventative stabilisation policy at the European periphery.
Overall, the overwhelming majority of the contributions take a clearly pro-European tone, at the same time calling for Germany to assume a leading role.
more assistance for Syrian refugees
What we are doing does not fulfil our great responsibility
“We have great respect for what Lebanon – a country which has its own difficulties to deal with – is doing to help.”
about the “grim situation” facing refugees both in and outside the camps as well as the “dangerous instability” which the floods of refugees signified for Lebanon’s internal cohesion.
The two foreign ministers were in agreement on their analysis that a political solution to the Syria conflict was still a long way off.
Very large numbers of close economic ties
Steinmeier said the situation in the refugee camp made one aware that “what we are doing does not fulfil our great responsability”.
In view of the radical changes in the Arab world and the dangers posed by the conflicts in the region, we have a keen interest in collaborating more intensively with the states in the Gulf region.
In my view, this affirms a development which I’ve been observing since the early days of my first term of office in 2005 – an impression which I initially formulated in my first speech to the Munich Security Conference in 2006, namely that energy policy is a core element of our foreign and security policy.
For example by shipping over liquid gas from Texas or Ohio or LNG from Qatar.
At present, these are no suitable ways of fending off the short-term threat to energy security, of defusing the situation.
And this was a success!
The German foreign minister also met his counterpart, Sheikh Abdullah bin Zayed Al Nahyan.
One million people followed the live streaming and that shows there is considerable interest, a great need for a political dialogue to overcome the divisions.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier was in the United Arab Emirates for political talks on 31 May.
Steinmeier with Crown Prince Sheikh Mohammed bin Zayed Al Nahyan
After arriving from Beirut, Foreign Minister Steinmeier held political talks in Abu Dhabi on Saturday (31 May).
Steinmeier announced that a high-level working group was to be established for regular political dialogue.
High-level working group for regular political dialogue
Press conference with Foreign Minister Sheikh Abdullah bin Zayed Al Nahyan
In Abu Dhabi, the largest of the seven United Arab Emirates, Steinmeier held extensive talks with Crown Prince Sheikh Mohammed bin Zayed Al Nahyan.
At a joint press conference with Foreign Minister Abdullah bin Zayed Al Nahyan, Steinmeier confirmed that they had agreed to have dialogue in future take place “not only as the situation arises when our foreign ministers visit one another” but also in the framework of a high-level working group.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier relayed his impressions of Lebanon to his opposite number in Abu Dhabi, telling him
Foreign Minister Steinmeier reiterated his understanding for the particular concern which the people of the Emirates are feeling in view of the conflict in their immediate neighbourhood.
He described the talks in recent months as “encouraging” and underlined the fact that Germany too, in the context of the E3+3, was working on the assumption that the timeframe for reaching agreement would be adhered to.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier with Undersecretary Mohammed Omar Abdullah
More than 1000 German companies are operating in Abu Dhabi and the other Emirates, while many UAE companies invest in Germany.
Investment issues were on the agenda later, when Steinmeier spoke to Sheikh Hamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan, head of ADIA, the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier had previously met the board of the German-Emirati Joint Council for Industry and Commerce that morning.
This saw Steinmeier join Undersecretary Mohammed Omar Abdulla of the Department of Economic Development in a conversation with German and UAE businessmen and women on the prospects of economic cooperation.
A glimpse of the meeting with proponents of the creative industries, hosted by Culture Minister Sheikh Nahyan Bin Mubarak Al Nahyan in the Majlis room
With that in mind, Steinmeier ended his visit on a meeting with the Minister of Culture and Youth, Sheikh Nahyan Bin Mubarak Al Nahyan.
Joined by members of the creative industries and academics from Germany, the two men engaged in lively exchange in a large group which included those responsible for the culture sector in the UAE.
Before embarking on his trip, Foreign Minister Steinmeier commented as follows on the prospects for his journey to the Gulf (29 May):
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and Qatar’s Foreign Minister Al Attiyah in Berlin (28 March)
His programme there includes a meeting with the Emir of Qatar, Sheikh Tamim Bin Hamad Al-Thani.
Steinmeier praised Qatar as an important player in the Gulf region which had “significance and influence in the whole Arab-Muslim world and beyond”.
And if that was possible for many decades and we know that disruptions in the energy supply are detrimental to all sides, then we should seek to ensure that energy policy and energy supplies don’t now become the object of major political conflict between East and West, between Russia and Ukraine, between Russia and the EU.
I also believe that – on purely economic grounds – it’s in Russia’s interest not to cast doubt on the country’s reliability in the economic and energy spheres.
The first solution is more Europe.
Energy union is therefore the key term.
The time has now come to select the most important energy projects throughout Europe not yet implemented which will make us less reliant on imports.
The first key word is therefore Europe, an energy union in Europe.
Sigmar Gabriel and the other G7 energy ministers spelled out to us at their meeting in Rome that no country should be dependent on one single supplier.
First of all, however, the extraction of shale gas enhances competitiveness in the countries where it’s produced!
I addressed this issue for the first time in the speech to the Munich Security Conference which I mentioned.
I hope you all enjoy fruitful discussions!
A more differentiated look at the responses reveals
that whether Germans want to see more or less involvement in foreign policy depends on the issues concerned.
An article by Winfried Nachtwei.
(1) The statistics seem to be clear:
Only 37% support stronger German involvement in international crises, whereas 60% are against the idea.
Open discussions in Qatar
On the last leg of his three-day trip, Foreign Minister Steinmeier was in Qatar for talks on 1 June.
The agenda included improving working conditions for foreign workers.
Qatar:
open discussions and a lot of potential for cooperation
On Sunday (1 June), the last day of his trip to the Arab world, Foreign Minister Steinmeier held talks in Qatar.
In the morning, his first meeting was with the Emirate’s head of state, Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani.
Their talks covered a number of subjects, including improving working conditions for foreign workers.
Frank-Walter Steinmeier arrived in Doha, the last stage of his trip to Arab states from 29 May till 1 June, on Saturday evening.
As he had done in Lebanon and the UAE, Steinmeier talked in Qatar about the further strengthening of bilateral relations and about current trouble spots in the region.
A focus on bilateral relations and regional trouble spots
Steinmeier with Emir Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani
The refugee issue could only really be resolved, he went on, “if we devote ourselves to finding a political solution to the conflict”.
Following the resignation of UN envoy Lakhdar Brahimi, every effort must now be made, the Minister continued, to find a suitable successor and give the new mediator a new mandate.
Steinmeier said Al Attiyah had made it clear that Qatar had taken initial decisions on improving working conditions.
“I can only encourage you to continue along this path,” he said.
Cooperation in the business and education sectors
Cooperation with Qatar is continually expanding in the business sector.
So during his time in Doha Foreign Minister Steinmeier also talked with the Qatari Minister of Economy and Commerce, Sheikh Ahmed bin Jassim bin Mohamed Al Thani.
Lebanon: More assistance for Syrian refugees
They not only discussed further strengthening economic exchange and investment, but also looked at current economic issues and major infrastructure projects under way in Qatar.
In the afternoon, Foreign Minister Steinmeier then visited a German-Qatari education project:
The inauguration took place on the school premises in Doha, in the company of the pupils and staff.
Bilateral relations with Qatar
During a visit to a refugee camp in the Bekaa Valley, as well as his political talks in Beirut, the focus of attention was on further support for Lebanon and the humanitarian situation of the refugees from Syria.
More assistance for Syrian refugees in Lebanon
There are now approx. 1750 PASCH schools around the world in total.
At a joint press conference, Steinmeier said he had reported to his colleague about his visit to Lebanon and about the pitiful situation of the Syrian refugees there – “for whom,” he said, “we need to do more”.
On Sunday morning, the foreign minister first of all met the Emir of Qatar, Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani, and Prime Minister Sheikh Abdullah bin Nasser bin Khalifa Al Thani.
Later he also met his Qatari counterpart, Khalid Al Attiyah.
Steinmeier previously met Al Attiyah when the latter paid his first official visit to Berlin on 28 March.
The Qatari side announced that the Emir would be visiting Germany in September.
The meeting focused on German-Qatari relations and the situation in Syria and Egypt.
According to Foreign Minister Steinmeier, international efforts to end the war in Syria should continue after the controversial presidential election.
The Group of Friends of the Syrian People should meet again, he said, and try again to investigate the possibility of a political solution.
Improving working conditions for foreign workers
Hygiene in the camps and medical care are causing major problems.
The German foreign minister emphasised the changes in the way major sporting events are organised, saying,
“Put yourself forward for a major sporting event and you should expect not only an exuberant celebration of football but also a lot of attention from the global public, focusing on the whole country including economic and working conditions.”
After his talks, however, he said he had the impression that
“efforts are being made to work of the causes of criticism”.
Talks with the Minister of Economy and Commerce, Sheikh Ahmed bin Jassim
He also brought a number of German textbooks and dictionaries to start the new German section of the library.
The full commentary on the survey:
Get involved or stay out of it?
It all depends!
The debate on the Germans’ view of their country’s foreign policy engagement is sometimes rather too simplistic in its interpretation of the survey results presented on 20 May at the conference to launch Review 2014.
Lebanon is one of the countries worst affected by the Syria war.
During his visit to Lebanon, Foreign Minister Steinmeier visited a camp for Syrian refugees.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier was in Lebanon from 29 to 30 May.
He announced that Germany is increasing its support by five million euros, which will be mainly used to provide medical care for the refugees.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier was there from 29 to 30 May.
The scale of the refugees’ plight became clear during a visit to a refugee camp in the Bekaa Valley, 50km south-east of Beirut:
several hundred people are enduring cramped conditions in makeshift tents and even in May, the air was dusty, hot and dry.
Here in Syria’s neighbouring country, we are witnessing the most serious refugee disaster for years.
More than nine million people have fled their homes and almost half of them have even left the country.
In the camp, workers from the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (the UNHCR) and the relief organisation WorldVision described their work.
Steinmeier later described the situation in the camp as appalling.
The Foreign Minister also spoke to refugee children in the stifling tents where they have lessons in the most basic conditions.
Despite the difficulties, however, children’s laughter can often be heard in the tents and along the paths through the camp.
The nearby UNHCR registration centre is the first port of call for those who have fled Syria.
There they are registered as refugees and receive initial assistance.
The head of the centre, Ninette Kelley, briefed the German Foreign Minister on the influx and registration of people who have fled Syria.
That the situation in Lebanon – which has taken in refugees despite only having around four million inhabitants and a fragile political situation – has to be urgently improved was discussed the previous day during talks with Lebanon’s Foreign Minister Gebran Bassil:
However, we also talked today about the fact that the country itself needs help and we spoke of the possibility of encouraging existing institutions such as the World Bank to make use of programmes and trust funds in order to stabilise institutions in Lebanon.
During further talks with, for instance, Prime Minister Tamam Salam, Foreign Minister Steinmeier commended Lebanon for its generosity in taking in so many refugees from Syria.
Anyone who’s seen the people here knows that their plight must spur us on to continue working on a political solution to the Syria conflict.
However, it is not clear whether people mean staying out of affairs in general (along the lines of “it’s nothing to do with us”) or military restraint.
Following the military (mis-)interpretation of the “Munich speeches”, the latter will certainly have been a factor.
(2) We must be careful not to overinterpret this initial response (neo-isolationism).
The following questions show that the majority of those who distance themselves from stronger German engagement are not adopting a categorical or indiscriminate position, but distinguish markedly between goals and fields of activity.
The majority of people cite peace in the world, human rights protection, climate and environmental protection, energy security, etc. as the top goals and responsibilities of German foreign policy.
There is clear support for priority to be given to peaceful and civil engagement.
(3) The question of more or less military engagement is far too indiscriminate in view of the broad spectrum of operational forms in place (ranging from military observation and UN peacekeeping to counter-insurgency measures).
At the moment our view is affected by the violent mission in Afghanistan in recent years.
The attitude towards military operations is generally restrained and distinguishes between different situations. Approval is highest when the protection of Europe, humanitarian assistance and peacekeeping are at stake, the most scepticism is addressed towards large-scale combat missions.
Experiences with international crisis management confirm this basic attitude.
It all depends on the specific purpose, the individual case and the effectivity of the measure.
Military personnel in particular will be able to appreciate this restraint, recognising that political conflict resolution must be the priority.
In practice the operational missions as formulated in the UN mandates for deployment of the Bundeswehr therefore meet with wide approval.
(4) In my view the occasional interpretation of the survey to imply that politicians calling for more active foreign policy are being held back by an “obtuse” population is inappropriate.
For many years the problem lay with a political leadership that itself lacked strategic thinking and a convincing peace and security policy.
(5) The survey results reflect the experiences I have gleaned from numerous political confrontations regarding German crisis involvement over the past twenty years.
The Ukraine crisis has made the security of supply a pressing political issue – and catapulted it into the consciousness of the informed public in a very new way.
for while earlier gas crises between Ukraine and Russia – 2006 and 2009 – perhaps still had no ramifications for other spheres and could be resolved on their own, this time the gas dispute is clearly part of the broader political conflict – and will certainly have consequences in Europe, and probably also global consequences!
Speech by Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier at the Second Energy Security Summit of the Munich Security Conference: “The Next Great Game? Global Impacts of the Shale Revolution”
When the theme of the conference was developed, the term energy security still meant something entirely  different.
And no-one should pretend to themselves that we can resolve this problem in the short term.
One day, the individual states in the EU will have lessened the risks stemming from the lack of security of supply, or security of supply based on one supplier.
Naturally, the round table cannot solve everything, but since much criticism has been voiced about this or that round table not reaching any decisions, I want to reiterate:
It provides a forum for dialogue and brings together people and organisations that – for different reasons – do not talk with each other at present.
Yesterday, we thought that a solution was just around the corner and that final decisions would perhaps be made during this conference.
That also applies to the expansion of LNG terminals – although here in front of an audience of experts there’s no need to express any doubts. At any rate, those who think that a few additional billions of cubic metres of LNG can be supplied to Europe by Qatar in the short term should think again. This should at least be discussed in a dialogue with the supplier countries themselves, which are producing at full capacity and aren’t even in a position to conclude new contracts.
Energy and climate diplomacy undoubtedly belong in the tool kit of foreign policy.
Wolfgang, as a diplomat with a delicate mission, you’ve been busy recently. With great skill and respect on all sides, you’ve organised round tables in Ukraine and chaired them together with former Presidents Kuchma and Kravchuk.
However, it can help to greatly reduce the susceptibility to mistakes in energy relations by developing a crisis-proof system of agreements which binds supplier, transit and consumer countries to a formal system of rules. However, it’s not the binding nature of this system which matters but its combination with a crisis resolution mechanism, which will hopefully ensure in future that energy and energy supplies don’t become a pawn of political and foreign policy interests.
On Wednesday, 4 June 2014, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier opened the World Congress of German Schools Abroad organised by the World Association of German Schools Abroad (WDA) and the Federal Office of Administration - Central Agency for Schools Abroad.
The slogan of this year’s congress is
“Worldwide Education. Worldwide Opportunities.”
www.weltkongress2014.de
“Moscow must stop fighters and weapons seeping in”
Lebanon is one of the neighbouring countries worst affected by the Syria war.
Germany has provided more than 500 million euros in aid since the outbreak of the conflict.
During his visit, Steinmeier announced that another five million euros would be made available, mainly for medical care but added thoughtfully:
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier talks to the newspaper Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung about the consequences of the European Parliament elections, the crisis in Ukraine and relations with Russia (interview published on 30 May 2014).
Minister, in many places in Europe people have voted for extremist parties – on the far-left and far-right as well as populist groups.
They are all sceptical, if not hostile, towards Europe.
What lessons are there to be learnt from these European elections?
First of all, it is appalling that these extremist parties performed so well in the elections.
In campaign speeches, I repeatedly said:
do not hand Europe over to those who oppose it!
I called on people to vote.
In places where voter turnout is high, extremists and populists have less of a chance.
Unfortunately though, turnout for the elections fell in most countries – in Slovakia only 13 percent of the population voted.
I am therefore all the more pleased that voter turnout rose in Germany.
Yet it did not manage to prevent populist, eurosceptic and even extreme right-wing parties from Germany gaining representation in Strasbourg and Brussels.
There are of course various reasons for this – in some places it serves as a warning to national governments, in other countries it is a consequence of the crisis in Europe which has been ongoing for more than four years now, as well as a reaction to economic stagnation and rising unemployment.
In this country, alongside the “Alternative für Deutschland” (Alternative for Germany) party, some bizarre splinter parties have obtained mandates.
Is this not a result of the ruling of the Federal Constitutional Court?
when some candidates and parties are standing in elections simply to make fun of election, voters and politicians alike the very next day...
...do you mean Martin Sonneborn’s satirical party...
That is not the only joke party, even if the fact that for instance the far-right NPD party gained seats in the European Parliament is far more serious in political terms.
Yet parties which have fun entertaining the public by withdrawing the day after the election, are not contributing to democracy – quite the opposite.
In fact I have my doubts as to whether small groups dedicated to a single topic gaining seats in the European Parliament really increases the degree to which the German political landscape is represented in Strasbourg.
We must, however, acknowledge that the Federal Constitutional Court rejected the five percent – as it did our subsequent suggestion of a three percent – threshold.
Is that a plea for European electoral law?
Absolutely!
We need a Europe-wide understanding on what the pre-requisites for and functions of a working parliament are.
We cannot knowingly walk into the same situation in five years’ time,
especially given the likelihood that, due to dozens of splinter groups, the European Parliament will not have proven its ability to function.
If it is not possible via national law, then perhaps we should consider whether some form of minimum threshold could be established at the European level.
The Front National has become France’s strongest party.
Surveys show that its voters do not only reject the government in Paris but also Europe as a whole.
President Hollande has to deal with this.
Will France now be a more difficult partner?
The Front National’s success is alarming.
This is not just France’s problem, but one affecting its neighbours and indeed all of Europe.
The Parti Socialiste has already called for a U-turn back to left-wing policies and the party’s original manifesto...
I think this is the right way forward.
The Euro crisis demands more Europe whilst citizens clearly want less – how can we address this contradiction?
One cannot lump everyone together.
I have seen that here in Germany, the majority of citizens want more Europe,
something which is evident in surveys and reflected in the election results.
in the countries where the economic crisis hit hardest, it is our duty to canvass renewed support for Europe and to ensure that not only are the economic figures changing – which they already are in many places – but that people’s prospects are improving with them, particularly those of young people.
That also means that we must use European resources to help successfully tackle youth unemployment.
Does that mean that treaty changes, with which Berlin is striving for more coordination of economic policy, have been put on the back burner?
Then we need a debate on how we can further improve our ability to function and take decisions in Brussels, above all with regard to economic and financial policy.
Anyone who wants to do this cannot fundamentally rule out treaty changes.
Is Berlin not confronted with quite different demands?
Some say that Paris is calling for the Federal Government to launch a 50 billion euro investment programme.
The only thing I’ve heard of that is what I read in the papers!
Neither the government in Paris nor any other government has made such a demand of us.
How we should overcome the crisis has been the subject of hot debate over the past four years.
Even when we were in opposition we argued that we needed a policy combination of disciplined spending, a focus on growth and structural reforms. This seems to be showing its first signs of success in the very countries which were at the centre of the crisis.
We should concentrate on the optimal use of the resources which we have, including the six billion euros for a programme on combating youth unemployment which have not yet been fully disbursed.
In addition to this, Europe must reflect on how to make the best use of European-level investment in diversifying our energy sector and in developing supply networks.
Martin Schulz, the Party of European Socialists’ nominated candidate, did well in Germany.
At the European level however, your political family are behind the European People’s Party.
Is there a prominent place for Schulz in the personnel package which EPP candidate Jean-Claude Juncker is trying to put together?
Martin Schulz is a passionate European.
Martin Schulz also campaigned actively in neighbouring European countries.
All of this distinguishes him as someone who has a justifiable claim to a leading position in Europe
and that is something that the social democrats will naturally demand.
By doing so, did he not create expectations which are now likely to be disappointed?
Sigmar Gabriel’s comments were not made offhand, but rather with reference to an agreement between the main political groups in the European Parliament...
...the old Parliament, the new one has not yet been formed...
...but it does have a significant influence.
Heads of state and government in Europe will indeed have to deal with this stance.
Would you agree with the assertion that we are on the right track in terms of European policy and that we should continue along it?
Yes, we are heading in the right direction.
out with Greece, out with Ireland, out with Portugal, get rid of the euro and let’s return to the Deutsche Mark!
where would Europe be today, if we had given in to seemingly simple remedies?
Especially now, in the midst of the greatest foreign policy challenge we have faced since the Berlin Wall came down.
I can hardly bear to imagine how a Europe, fallen apart and in disarray, would be capable of responding effectively.
Despite all justified criticism on individual points:
our Europe proved itself during the economic crisis
and its unity is proving its mettle once again with the crisis in Ukraine.
In Ukraine, the presidential elections were won by Petro Poroshenko, which the Federal Government has described as progress.
Yet Russia is sending contradictory messages.
Can we continue letting them lead us down the garden path?
I’m sorry but that is an entirely false perception.
Things are not as they were before.
There is mostly radio silence between NATO and Russia, between the European Union and Russia.
The efforts of the few who are trying to prevent this radio silence from leading to a direct confrontation with even more dramatic consequences should not be understood as them going about business as usual.
Nevertheless they are necessary if we want to avoid a new and lasting division of Europe from arising.
Do the presidential elections mean that we’re out of the woods?
The election in Ukraine did not resolve the crisis,
but still, a few weeks ago no one even thought that they would take place.
I am pleased that people had the chance to vote, that nearly all polling stations could open, voter turnout was high, that the election day passed peacefully and that the end result was so clear.
The fact that Petro Poroshenko could attract many more votes, in all parts of the country – including the east, than any other candidate is a first in the history of Ukraine and is a strong sign of the country’s unity.
This election has nudged open a door, which we must squeeze through in order for Ukraine to have a chance at achieving political and economic stability.
Does Russia also view things in this way?
We’ll see.
It took a lot of work to get to where we are now.
Indeed we have diplomatic initiatives from our country to thank that at least some initial steps towards a cautious de-escalation of the conflict were possible – the OSCE mission, Geneva, the national dialogue and the round tables, Wolfgang Ischinger’s countless talks, visits to Ukraine...
Above all we have seen a willingness to be open to cooperating with the newly elected Ukrainian President.
Is that not just the continuation of Moscow’s double game?
Cold War veterans are not the only ones who say that only harsh statements get through to Putin, your predecessor Joschka Fischer does too.
It is not a question of choosing between tough treatment and a soft touch!
We need both!
Intense fighting over the airport in Donetsk, heavy weapons used by the separatists, a growing number of deaths and injuries, no respect for the work of OSCE observers –
all of this shows a new dimension to the violent clashes in Donbass,
and for newly-elected President Poroshenko this presents a huge challenge.
Our clear expectation of Moscow is for it to use its influence on the different separatist groups and, together with the new Ukrainian leadership, to stop fighters and weapons from making their way over the border between Ukraine and Russia.
Given fears in eastern Europe, has the time come to debate the deployment of NATO troops to the military alliance’s eastern border?
The NATO Secretary General has started the discussion.
That was why we were willing to participate in increased NATO activities, for instance in the field of air policing in the Baltic region or naval exercises in the Baltic sea.
And I might add that
not every comment made by NATO in Brussels in the past few weeks was helpful.
In this issue, as in the question of sector-specific sanctions, we saw rifts within the EU.
Nevertheless Europe has shown terrific unity in this crisis.
We have sent out clear signals whilst at the same time taking care not to fall into political automatisms, which could put us on the path to economic warfare, as we ramp up political pressure.
We have opened up paths back to a political process with every decision we have taken.
I hope that we have now reached a point at which decisions to implement measures which we have prepared...
...by which you mean third-tier economic sanctions...
...can be avoided.
In any case, the election in Ukraine is an opportunity rather than the political solution to the crisis – we are still a long way away from that.
Is Russia undertaking a consistent change of course?
We are without a doubt in a new phase in East-West relations.
It is not yet clear what this will mean over the next 20 or 30 years.
A lot will depend on whether the current crisis can be overcome or whether the question of Crimea and the situation in Ukraine remain a source of ongoing conflict with Russia.
The Chancellor recently told this newspaper that a close partnership with Russia should be continued in the medium to long term.
How does this statement fit in with the message that there will not be a repeat of the situation following the war in Georgia, in which the conflict over Abkhazia and South Ossetia froze over and shortly afterwards we saw a return to business as usual.
When Washington says: we are not seeking confrontation with Russia but rather – if possible – cooperation, then that is the same message.
No one who I speak to is interested in breaking off relations with or dangerously isolating Russia in the long run.
We want cooperation, if and as far as it is possible, but Russia needs to give us the opportunity to overcome the current crisis.
Then we can work out what prospects we have for future cooperation.
However, it’s too early for that now.
The conversation with the Foreign Minister was conducted by Günther Nonnenmacher and Majid Sattar.
Reproduced by kind permission of the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung.
I’m secretly pleased therefore that the Munich Security Conference has organised a conference on energy security.
Western Germany was groaning under the influx of millions of people from the eastern regions.
The East was witnessing the plundering of the industrial landscape.
At that time, 64 years ago, who in Europe would have placed any hope in Schuman’s words regarding the unification of the European nations?
it is not only Schuman’s hopes that have become a reality, but also the hopes of very many Europeans of a life in freedom and peace – for those who at that time were not able or not permitted to believe that this could ever happen.
Once again courageous people made something possible that nobody had dared hope for, people in Leipzig, in Berlin, in Rostock and in other places who tore down the Iron Curtain piece by piece and thus freed the way for the reunification of our continent.
I do wonder whether it should be so unacceptable forever to consider a minimum threshold for entry into the European Parliament,
Nonetheless, when I attended a French cabinet meeting recently, I left with the impression that following the cabinet reshuffle, the government is determined to continue to reform and to guide the country back to a path of economic growth, thus taking the wind out of the sails of right-wing nationalists.
Following the elections, Prime Minister Valls made it clear that the government does not think the election results give cause to take a left-wing, populist course but rather to continue with the reforms which have been initiated.
Germany is Europe’s anchor of stability – with good results for pro-European parties, strong growth in our economy which is pulling our partners up with us and also a labour market with the capacity to absorb more people.
But of course this also means that expectations of Berlin are now even higher. But, yes, you are right:
Now, in light of the election results, decisions need to be taken as quickly as possible regarding the new personnel of the European institutions.
How we can achieve this as well as which political and legislative paths we will need to embark upon in order to do so are crucial questions for Europe’s future, and we must address them following the new formation of the European Commission.
Giving up now, when the hardest part is behind us, and accumulating new debt is something I would view as a grave mistake.
In Germany he actively campaigned for the Social Democratic Party, he generated new interest for Europe and he greatly helped to mobilise the German voters.
During the election campaign, SPD Chairman Sigmar Gabriel implied that Federal Chancellor Angela Merkel would be dealing a great blow to democracy in Europe if the next President of the Commission was not one of the two nominees, Martin Schulz or Jean-Claude Juncker.
Imagine what would have happened if we had listened to those proposing quick – fix solutions at the height of the crisis in Europe –
Quite apart from the fact that it would have been economic suicide for us Germans,
If nothing else, Moscow changed its tune regarding the elections and the new political leadership in Kyiv.
Three weeks ago Russia was openly questioning the legitimacy of the elections; now, after election day the results are at least said to be respected.
We will soon see whether this is actually the case once he has been inaugurated on 7 June.
Strong and weak have not proven themselves to be very good criteria in terms of foreign policy, what really count are prudence and the will to stop conflicts from spiralling out of control.
That is why I’m sometimes simply irritated by criticism that our foreign policy is supposedly weak, because this gives far too little thought to striking the right balance between exercising political pressure and making use of the necessary instruments for conflict de-escalation.
It does not however even look as if Russia is interested in stabilising eastern Ukraine.
Following the outbreak of the crisis, I was one of the first to travel to the Baltic region and eastern Europe in order to signal that we will stand by our partners and that we are aware of the particular situation of the countries in Russia’s neighbourhood.
I know that Estonia and Latvia are particularly concerned about the effects that the crisis in Ukraine could have, even from afar, given their sizeable Russian-speaking minorities.
Should we not be concerned that Germany is once again perceived as being influenced by its special relationship with Russia?
It comes as no surprise to me that, in light of varying distances from the Ukraine conflict, differing perceptions and historical experiences with Russia, debates have been and still are arising.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier will open the World Congress of German Schools Abroad
The world congress is taking place from 4-7 June 2014. Alongside the 450-odd members of school boards, head teachers and administrators from the approximately 140 German Schools Abroad, it will for the first time also be attended by representatives of the 1100 schools which offer the DSD, the German Language Certificate of the Standing Conference of the Ministers of Education and Cultural Affairs.
As well as strengthening the network of Schools Abroad, the intention is to demonstrate the potential inherent in these schools for a domestic audience and to raise awareness of the public-private approach that the German Schools Abroad are based on.
A detailed programme of events is available here:
Only one year had passed since the Berlin blockade.
From a rational perspective, maybe not, but hope prevailed in the end, and the forces that unite us retained the upper hand over the things that divide us.
I believe this thought can encourage us.
Ten years ago the European Union did not only become larger, it also gained considerably in terms of experience, history and political influence by its eastward enlargement.
But above all, Europe has grown richer, richer in terms of language, richer in terms of culture, richer in terms of ideas and prospects.
I could tell you, for example, that in Hungary, the Czech Republic, Slovakia and Poland purchasing power has increased consistently since 2004.
I could say to all those who ten years ago were predicting doom and gloom, that according to the Association of German Chambers of Commerce and Industry hundreds of thousands of new jobs have been created in Germany as a result of eastward enlargement – some even say up to one million.
On a day like today we should acknowledge the human achievements that lie behind this success, the degree of strength, courage, adaptation and flexibility required, both from a political and economic perspective and within day-to-day family life.
This persistent social transformation in the new member states which joined in 2004, the political changes and the setbacks:
all these, I believe constitute an invaluable trove of experience for Europe, particularly today in our efforts to facilitate elections in Ukraine and to use the resources at our disposal.to bring the country back onto a stable track.
In this area we urgently need the experience gleaned by these Eastern European countries, which have survived the changes they faced after 2004.
I am saying this despite the fact that this tenth anniversary in Europe comes at a damned difficult time - we had a debate on this in this House only recently.
I believe that we are over the worst of the European economic crisis, but we all sense that the political crisis continues to gnaw at the heart of Europe.
in the context of foreign policy we are facing our most serious crisis since the end of the Cold War.
Confidence and belief in Robert Schuman and his visions has undoubtedly been damaged – that is certainly a view shared by many.
How can we ensure that Europe actually stands shoulder to shoulder during a phase of foreign policy challenges?
Looking back on the past four years in particular, which required us here in this House to participate in innumerable debates, many of them critical, I think we can say:
We have to take a critical look at ourselves in Germany and ask what state we would be in if we had followed the advice of those who suggested at weekly intervals that we just distance ourselves from one Southern European country or another.
Today, when peace in Europe is under threat, would we be able to present the same united front if we had followed their advice then and acted unwisely?
Yet community also requires us to not simply turn a blind eye to any existing problems, and there are indeed problems.
We must be able to demand that tasks which have not yet been performed are completed.
We must insist on this, even though we know that it is sometimes difficult.
our Eastern European partners who tackle such urgent reforms can depend on our support.
Anyone who has attended a Council of Ministers in Brussels knows the amount of institutional work and renewal efforts that lie ahead of us in this area.
Sixty-four years ago he said that
And that is why I say that in such a phase of sometimes incessant crisis management, even on a day like this, we may still find a rare opportunity to stop and reflect for a few seconds.
the creative efforts he demanded, also from us today, are worth all the hard work.
Georgia hands over looted art to Germany
Steinmeier signs the guest book at the Bode Museum
Close cultural relations between Georgia and Germany
Address by the German Foreign Minister
Statement by Human Rights Commissioner Strässer on the 25th anniversary of the Tiananmen Square protests
Christoph Strässer, the Federal Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid at the Federal Foreign Office, issued the following statement today (3 June) to mark the 25th anniversary of the violent crushing of the democratic movement in Beijing’s Tiananmen Square on 4 June 1989.
Today, on the 25th anniversary of the tragic events in Tienanmen Square, we remember those who lost their lives striving for democracy.
This Dialogue provides a forum for in-depth discussion of the whole spectrum of current human rights issues.
Promoting human rights
The German-Chinese Human Rights Dialogue has taken place since 2003 and is chaired on the German side by the Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid at the Federal Foreign Office.
I call for the release of these journalists, civil rights activist and relatives.
One of my tasks is the regular and intensive conduct of the Human Rights Dialogue with China – an important element of our comprehensive relations with the country.
I have thus invited my Chinese interlocutors to Berlin to continue our joint dialogue on all relevant issues.
Together with thousands of other volumes, they had been kept for decades in the University Library in Tbilisi.
Steinmeier continued:
among them journalist Gao Yu, lawyer Pu Zhiqiang and philosopher Xu Youyu.
A bridge to Europe
Germany and Georgia had been steadily moving closer together during the last few years.
The German Foreign Minister added:
Georgia has come far during the last few years:
in terms of consolidating democracy, implementing economic reforms and moving closer to the European Union.
German-Georgian relations
In their speeches, Garibashvili and Steinmeier paid tribute to the friendship and trust between Germany and Georgia.
I appeal to the Chinese leadership to release all those still detained in connection with the events of 4 June 1989.
It is deplorable that recently there has been a new wave of arrests with relatives, intellectuals and others commemorating the dead and trying to kick off a debate on the events of 25 years ago being taken into custody.
4 June marks 25 years to the day since the protests in Beijing’s Tienanmen Square.
In the run-up to the anniversary, numerous Chines civil rights activists, journalists, lawyers and other human rights defenders have been arrested since April,
Its 11th round took place in China (Yinchuan, Ningxia Province) on 13 and 14 May 2013, the next one is scheduled to take place in Germany.
Berlin’s Bode Museum is actually better known for its large collection of sculptures.
“There is no turning back”, stated Irakli Garibashvili.
The return of the books removed from Germany during the Second World War showed the good will of the Georgian people and should help intensify German-Georgian relations, he added.
The handover on 2 June is regarded as the symbolic prelude to the return of the entire collection to Germany.
Expression of trust and friendship
He added that this part of Germany’s cultural heritage was very nearly lost for good and that Georgia paving the way for the return of the books had ensured that this did not happen.
Steinmeier said that the two books bore witness to the turbulent history of Georgia and Germany in Europe.
He went on to say that the handover would open a new chapter in this history, one marked by friendship and trust rather than war and division and that this was worthwhile working for today.
However, on Monday evening (2 June), the statues were merely the silent witnesses to a much livelier audience which had gathered in the Museum for the ceremony:
alongside the Georgian Prime Minister, the German Foreign Minister and his Georgian counterpart, numerous other German and Georgian guests of honour were present to watch the handover of two books, followed by a classical concert.
He went on to say that Georgia was now moving closer to Europe and that this would be underscored by the signing of the Association Agreement with the European Union on 27 June.
He said that the two books not only stood for an entire library but that they also bore witness to a turbulent history.
It could not be taken for granted that Georgia, a country whose people endured such terrible suffering during the Second World War, would decide to hand over these books.
This act is an expression of the trust and friendship which link Georgia and Germany today.
The foundations have been laid.
Beijing’s Tiananmen Square
At a ceremony in the Bode Museum in Berlin on 2 June, Georgia’s Prime Minister Irakli Garibashvili presented Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier with two books removed from Germany during the Second World War.
On 2 June, Georgia’s Prime Minister Irakli Garibashvili presented Foreign Minister Steinmeier with two books removed from Germany during the Second World War.
The books are part of the large collection of up to 70,000 books which were taken from Germany during the war and later discovered in the University Library in Tbilisi.
Georgia’s Prime Minister Irakli Garibashvili hands over the books to Foreign Minister Steinmeier
In his address, Georgia’s Prime Minister Irakli Garibashvili praised the close cultural cooperation between Georgia and Germany.
He said that when Georgia declared its independence in 1991, Germany was one of the first countries to recognise it.
The two 18th-century volumes originate from German public and private collections.
They were discovered in the University Library in Tbilisi in 2006 among around 70,000 books removed from Germany during the war.
After the formal handover, Foreign Minister Steinmeier thanked the Georgian Prime Minister.
Steinmeier went on to say that it was no coincidence that his first joint trip with French Foreign Minister Laurent Fabius had taken him to Tbilisi.
The Association Agreement with the EU, due to be signed soon, will form a bridge which will bring us closer together in future.
Click here to read the full text of Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s address
Close ties with Georgia: Foreign Minister Panjikidze visits Berlin (10 April 2014)
25th anniversary of the Tiananmen Square protests
The Federal Government’s Human Rights Commissioner Christoph Strässer remembers the violent suppression of the democratic movement in Beijing’s Tiananmen Square 25 years ago and calls on the Chinese leadership to release all those still detained in connection with the events of 4 June 1989.
His first stop was in Abu Dhabi, the largest of the seven United Arab Emirates.
Steinmeier met with senior politicians and business leaders.
Political cooperation was also high on the agenda.
Matters discussed included regional issues such as the war in Syria and the negotiations on the Iranian nuclear programme.
Steinmeier and his counterpart Sheikh Abdullah bin Zayed also discussed ways of strengthening bilateral cooperation.
Steinmeier announced:
QUOTE:
Here he discussed political and business matters with interlocutors including the head of state, Emir Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad.
Steinmeier issued the following statement after talking to the country’s leaders.
It was my impression that this message was not only understood, but that work is already under way to remove the basis of the criticism.
We can but strengthen Qatar in its resolve to continue these reforms.
In Qatar he inaugurated a new partner school with a focus on German.
The pupils at the Tariq bin Ziad School in Doha will receive more intensive German instruction from this year.
I said that the nature of major sporting events and the organisation of such events had changed over time.
In Doha, Steinmeier also raised the issue of workers’ rights for foreign labourers.
The smoke screen of “international responsibility”
One catchphrase, three interpretations
The general call for Germany to shoulder more responsibility can veil widely differing ideas – from more involvement in the peaceful resolution of international conflicts or more commitment to a united Europe to greater willingness to intervene militarily.
Some of these ideas are good, some are, with good reason, unpopular.
“Anyone who makes an abstract demand for Germany to assume more responsibility should lay out in concrete terms exactly what they mean by this.”
“If we assume responsibility we are just as responsible for the things we don’t do as for the things we do” according to this blog.
“New power, new responsibilities” states the paper on redefining German foreign policy by the Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik and German Marshall Fund of the United States.
At the Munich Security Conference, Federal President Gauck stated that:
“We Germans are advancing towards a form of responsibility that has not yet become routine for us.”
Yet without context, the term “responsibility” has no real meaning.
Or is there anyone who would call for irresponsible foreign policy?
The key question is:
for whom and for what do we assume responsibility?
With what means?
On the occasion of the speeches in Munich by the Federal President, Foreign Minister and Minister of Defence another question has also arisen:
which interpretation of “responsibility” is on political decision-makers’ minds?
There are three possible readings:
In a well-meaning interpretation of the call for more responsibility, Joachim Gauck, Frank-Walter Steinmeier and Ursula von der Leyen are concerned that Germans do not show enough interest in the world.
International politics and the various crises around the world should spark interest and provoke discussions amongst citizens as to how and where the Federal Republic of Germany could and should play a bigger role in addressing conflicts.
Yet another interpretation of the push in Munich is
the abstention from the UN resolution on Libya).
Thus the Federal Republic needs to act boldly, in a manner commensurate with Germany’s economic clout and strategic importance in the EU and NATO.
(Depending on the observer the debate has either a rather transatlantic or European slant).
Joachim Gauck, Frank-Walter Steinmeier and Ursula von der Leyen wanted to pick up on these concerns in order to reassure the international community and to reconcile the German people to the idea that their new role in the world could not be one akin to being a “large Switzerland”.
Finally, there is a critical interpretation of the call for more responsibility:
certain parts of Germany’s security policy elite take exception to the population’s clear refusal for the Bundeswehr to carry out operational missions.
The citizens seem to be fundamentally sceptical towards the use of military force.
This reticence, according to this school of thought, is proving to be more and more of a brake pad which needs to be removed.
Only then would Germany, as a central European power, have the full gamut of traditional security policy tools available to it and be on a par with Great Britain and France.
These three interpretations of “international responsibility” are very different.
Anyone who makes an abstract demand for Germany to assume more responsibility should lay out exactly what they mean in concrete terms,
as concrete proposals provide for better debates.
And the last, military, interpretation of responsibility outlined here is likely to be clearly rejected, with good reason, by the broad majority of society in Germany.
Blog author:
Arvid Bell, scientist at the Peace Research Institute Frankfurt.
Having regard not least to the many views we share, as discussed today, we have agreed today that we will establish a high level working group to sustain regular dialogue that will supplement visits by Foreign Ministers on matters of concern and on opportunities for the future.
Bid to host a major sporting event and you should not expect only an exuberant celebration of football but also a lot of attention from the global public, focusing on the whole country including economic and working conditions.
To help them with their lessons, Steinmeier handed over text books and dictionaries for the new school library.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s talks in the United Arab Emirates and Qatar focused on regional trouble spots and strengthening bilateral relations.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier travelled to the Gulf states on 30 May.
More than 1000 German firms are involved in major projects in the Emirates, above all in Dubai and Abu Dhabi.
The UAE is a direct neighbour of Iran’s.
After leaving Abu Dhabi, Foreign Minister Steinmeier continued his talks in neighbouring Qatar.
His talks with Foreign Minister Khalid Al Attiyah centred on German-Qatari cooperation and regional conflicts such as the war in Syria.
While in Doha, Steinmeier raised an important issue –
the preparations for the 2022 World Cup in Qatar and the criticism expressed over the past months about the poor working conditions for foreign workers.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier did not arrive empty handed.
This is just one investment in German-Qatari cooperation in the field of education.
If this is indeed the matter in question then the following could be a possibility: an open debate with the public (who, according to surveys are very interested in foreign policy) on the goals, strategies and instruments of German foreign policy (“Review 2014” is a good start), more international topics and foreign policy debates in schools, more capacity for peace and conflict research in universities, more public participation in concrete foreign policy decisions, a critical assessment of our (Germany, Europe and the West’s) role in exacerbating conflicts around the world (agricultural subsidies, arms exports, climate policy, failing to reach the Millennium Development Goals, sealing ourselves off from refugees).
In concrete terms, more responsibility could mean that Germany should ramp up its efforts to prevent and resolve international conflicts (development cooperation, taking in refugees, diplomatic, financial and material support for the UN in crisis zones), to pursue an active foreign policy which is committed to crisis prevention and de-escalation.
that the international security policy community, considersGermany’s foreign policy of recent years to be too “passive” one example being
Whoever reads “more international responsibility” in this way may have an active German diplomacy in mind with regard to topics such as Iran’s nuclear programme, the crisis in Ukraine or the Arab Spring, increased German commitment to a common European foreign policy, for Germany to guide debates within the EU and NATO by providing more impetus, or even for there to be more burden sharing between Western partners.
In plain terms, this interpretation of “responsibility” is a thinly veiled call for a militarisation of German foreign policy.
In concrete terms this would entail, for example, weakening or even abolishing the requirement for parliamentary approval of military missions, moving away from the culture of military restraint, orienting German foreign policy to German and Western interests to the detriment of values and international norms and a “reconciliation” of the German people to military operations as a supposedly “normal” instrument of foreign policy.
PRIF Point of View 1/2014:
– “Engaged foreign policy and military restraint do not conflict with one another” (in German)
Poland has clearly become a real anchor of stability in Europe.
I am pleased that Germany and Poland now enjoy the closest friendship we have had in centuries.
Good news that Germany is so well regarded.
It is good news that Germany is so well regarded around the world.
Our high standing is also an important foreign-policy resource which we must handle with due sensitivity.
The Coordinator of German-Polish Intersocietal and Cross-Border Cooperation issued the following statement in Potsdam on 4 June 2014:
Let us today remember the Polish people’s overwhelming courage to gain freedom
On this day we remember the Polish people’s overwhelming courage to gain freedom. Without this courage, the peaceful revolutions of 1989 in Eastern Europe – and also German and European unification – would not have been possible.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier on the BBC country rating poll:
In the BBC’s annual poll rating the standing and influence of 24 countries, Germany has in 2014 once again come out top.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier commented on this today (4 June) in Berlin as follows:
It is particularly gratifying that in all world regions Germany’s role is viewed as positive.
This testifies to the good reputation German artists, sportsmen and sportswomen as well as companies enjoy around the world.
And it demonstrates what a powerful attraction Germany holds as an outward-looking, globally connected and economically strong society that cares about solidarity with the weak and vulnerable.
We have a responsibility to pursue a far-sighted foreign policy that further enhances the trust people place in our country.
For our actions also in the foreign policy sphere can earn us high esteem only if we continue to be perceived internationally as a fair, honest and reliable partner.
More on the BBC country rating poll in the article on diplo.de.
Brandenburg’s Minister-President Dietmar Woidke has called the elections which took place in Poland 25 years ago a historic event.
Back then this date was a milestone in the struggle for freedom which had gained renewed strength and direction with the trade union movement Solidarnosc.
The opposition in the then GDR took courage from this election day.
We Germans are aware of the part Poland played in Germany’s reunification and we are deeply grateful for that.
For Poland, these elections marked the start of the road back to Europe, back to its historical and cultural place among Europe’s liberal democracies.
The EU’s eastward enlargement ten years ago marked the end of the East-West divide in Europe.
He hoped that the young woman would “soon be able to lead a normal life with her husband and children”.
It culminated in the appointment of the first non-Communist head of government in the then Warsaw Pact.
On the occasion of the 25th anniversary of the semi-free elections in Poland on 4 June 1989, Federal Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement in Berlin today (4 June):
Steinmeier with Sudanese Foreign Minister Ali Karti
During the difficult years after the imposition of martial law in 1981 and the ban on Solidarnosc, Poles refused to be disheartened and paved the way for the peaceful transition at the round table.
Without the freedom movement in Poland and in other Central European countries, 9 November 1989, the day the Berlin Wall fell, would have been inconceivable.
Today we celebrate together with our Polish friends, who 25 years ago took a courageous and important step towards democracy and freedom.
Without 1989, the later landmarks along this path, NATO accession in 1999 and EU membership in 2004, would not have been possible.
I hope that the young woman will soon be able to lead a normal life in freedom with her children and her husband.
Quash this inhuman death sentence!
I told the Sudanese Foreign Minister that the general public in Germany was outraged by the case and that it casts a shadow on how his country is viewed by people in Germany.
Germany will support Nigeria in the fight against Boko Haram
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier issued the following statement in light of the recent brutal attacks in Nigeria:
We condemn the acts of terror committed by Boko Haram in Nigeria in the strongest possible terms.
We want to work together to combat the Islamist terrorism which is taking such a terrible toll on Nigeria.
I have expressly reassured Nigeria’s Foreign Minister that Germany will support his country in the fight against Boko Haram.
We also want to help with conflict prevention.
We will discuss the concrete details when the German-Nigerian Binational Commission meets in a few weeks.
Since the beginning of 2014 there has been a marked increase in attacks carried out by the terrorist group Boko Haram.
Many Nigerians have fled the region, seeking refuge in neighbouring countries.
25th anniversary of the elections of 4 June 1989: “Day which brings great joy to Poland and Germany”
The 25th anniversary of the historic elections in Poland on 4 June 1989 is a day which brings great joy to Poland and Germany.
Quash the conviction of Meriam Ibrahim!
Foreign Minister Steinmeier has lent his support to the campaign to release Sudanese national Meriam Ibrahim, calling for the reversal of the “inhuman ruling” against her in his talks with Foreign Minister Karti of the Sudan.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier on the death sentence handed down to Meriam Yehya Ibrahim in the Sudan:
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier issued the following statement this evening (4 June), after meeting with the Sudanese Foreign Minister, Ali Karti:
We also spoke about the case of Meriam Yehya Ibrahim, a young woman who has been condemned to death in the Sudan for abandoning the Muslim faith, and who recently gave birth in prison.
We expect this inhuman death sentence against Meriam Yehya Ibrahim to be quashed.
In mid-May 2014 a Sudanese court of first instance in Khartoum condemned Meriam Yehya Ibrahim Ishag to death for abandoning her Muslim faith.
Visit to Lebanon, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates
His political talks focused on the Syria conflict and, above all, the situation of Syrians fleeing the civil war.
He also met representatives of civil society during the trip.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier was in the Arab region from 29 May to 1 June.
I have conveyed my deepest sympathy to my Nigerian colleague and those who have lost loved ones, as well as to the families of the abducted girls.
We plan to intensify our cooperation in the police and security sectors.
The group took the children to an unknown location on 14 April 2014 and have threatened to sell them.
The German-Nigerian Binational Commission will convene in Abuja, Nigeria on 10 July.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier spoke to Nigeria’s Foreign Minister Aminu Wali on the phone on 4 June.
After claiming responsibility for two car bombs in Abuja, the Islamist terrorist group Boko Haram also declared that it had kidnapped more than 200 girls from a school in northern Nigeria.
We plan to set up projects to support the families affected and the kidnapped girls’ villages.
German-British coordination in difficult times
Foreign Minister Steinmeier has met his British counterpart Hague for informal consultations in Berlin.
Close coordination with British partners at a difficult time
The focus was on the situation in the Western Balkans and Afghanistan’s prospects from 2015 onwards.
From Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s point of view, the dangerous developments in Europe’s immediate neighbourhood have confronted the continent with its greatest foreign policy challenge since the end of the Cold War.
It is therefore particularly important to seek out close collaboration with Germany’s partners and to maintain dialogue with all sides.
Focus on Europe’s common foreign policy
Close coordination was also the focus of the discussion between Steinmeier and his British counterpart Hague on Wednesday evening.
The priorities of this German-British coordination were the situation in the Western Balkans, particularly in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the future of involvement in Afghanistan.
German-British relations
Steinmeier opens the World Congress of German Schools Abroad
Foreign Minister Steinmeier yesterday (4 June) opened the World Congress of German Schools Abroad.
The congress, which runs till Saturday, will be attended by some 140 schools from more than 70 countries.
On Wednesday evening (4 June), Foreign Minister Steinmeier opened the World Congress of German Schools Abroad.
The congress, which runs till Saturday, will be attended by representatives of some 140 schools from more than 70 countries; its slogan is “Worldwide Education. Worldwide Opportunities.”
Orchestra of the German School in Pretoria
Lots of different languages could be heard in the crowded Weltsaal on Wednesday evening (4 June) before the orchestra of the German School in Pretoria struck up to open proceedings.
Despite their different mother tongues, they are all united by their enthusiasm for the German language and German culture.
Praise for the German Schools Abroad Act
The guests were welcomed to the congress by Sylvia Löhrmann, President of the Standing Conference of the Ministers of Education and Cultural Affairs of the Länder in the Federal Republic of Germany.
Löhrmann extended particular thanks to Cornelia Pieper, former Minister of State at the Federal Foreign Office with responsibility for culture, who was instrumental in pushing through the German Schools Abroad Act.
Steinmeier opens the World Congress of German Schools Abroad
On 21 and 22 May 2014 a symposium took place in Tanzania on combating dangerous pathogens, organised by the Bundeswehr Institute of Microbiology (IMB) and the Mbeya Medical Research Centre.
But this was no reason to give in to resignation, the Minister continued: on the contrary, it was an incentive “to give the world the best (...) we have to offer:
Presidential elections in Egypt
Click here to read the full text of Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s speech.
Preparation for studies in Germany
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier has met his British counterpart William Hague at short notice for informal consultations in Berlin.
Foreign Ministers Steinmeier and Hague in the garden of Villa Borsig located in Berlin’s Tegel district.
In Villa Borsig, the guest house on Lake Tegel, the two Foreign Ministers discussed current matters on the international agenda as well as Europe’s common foreign policy.
Wang Hongyi from China and Julian Ingendaay from Spain, both still at school, also intend to go to university in Germany.
Wang Hongyi said at first she had terrible trouble learning German, like Mark Twain.
However, she was fascinated by the “precision and gravity”of the German language, and this had helped shape her way of thinking.
The aim of the project in Tanzania is to establish a German-Tanzanian network and set up an effective system of diagnosing potentially dangerous biological pathogens in the country, thus taking preventative measures to curb their abuse.
Symposium on biosecurity in Tanzania
Speech by Foreign Minister Steinmeier at the opening of the World Congress of German Schools Abroad (4 June 2014)
The symposium served as a forum for exchange between experts on highly dangerous pathogens found in Tanzania as well as an opportunity to present the different research and educational goals of the project.
The event marks the start of a series of workshops on the topic.
Particular attention was paid to fighting the current outbreak of dengue fever in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania’s capital.
German Partnership Program for Excellence in Biological and Health Security
The Federal Foreign Office is supporting the IMB project in Tanzania under the auspices of the German Partnership Program for Excellence in Biological and Health Security, which is part of the global partnership of G7 countries.
Signing the administrative agreement on the German Schools Abroad Act (6 December 2013)
We have taken note of the results of the presidential election in Egypt,
which was won by Abdul Fattah al-Sisi.
Germany and Egypt have traditionally enjoyed good relations and have a long-standing partnership; close ties of friendship exist between our peoples.
We hope that Egypt will continue to play an important and constructive role in the region.
Egypt faces enormous challenges.
This is the basis on which the German Government will engage with Egypt’s new political leaders.
EU observers monitored the elections at the invitation of the Egyptian Government.
A Federal Foreign Office spokesman issued the following statement on the results of the Egyptian presidential election:
The aim now must be to improve economic and social opportunities for the people and to overcome social polarisation.
Presidential elections were held in Egypt from 26 to 28 May 2014. They were won by the former Defence Minister, Abdul Fattah al-Sisi.
The preliminary statement issued by the EU election observation mission noted that the elections had proceeded in a peaceful and orderly manner whilst highlighting a number of structural shortcomings in the electoral process, including the marginalisation of opposition forces.
We also refer to the European Union statement.
Minister of State Böhmer launches the German-Russian Year of Language and Literature
The year ahead will showcase the German language and literature in Russia and the Russian language and literature in Germany through a wide variety of events.
Ambassador Cyrus presents historical border documents to former AU Commissioner Lamamra
Since 2008, the Federal Foreign Office has supported an ambitious project run by the African Union (AU) on border demarcation and cross-border cooperation in Africa.
to date, agreements have been reached on over 2000km of African borders.
African Border Day has been celebrated in June every year since 2011.
It was established by the African Union and serves to celebrate the contribution that the African Union Border Programme (AUBP) has made to peace and security on the continent.
Border fence in Mozambique
In 1964, African heads of State and Government reached an agreement on the principle of the sanctity of borders:
Borders should become bridges
The motto of the African Union Border Programme is thus “From Barriers to Bridges”.
Many borders in Africa remain disputed
Moreover, a cross-border health centre has been opened – the first of its kind in Africa.
The cross-border health centre in Mali and Burkina Faso
Civilian crisis prevention in Africa
This can only be successfully done if human rights and media freedoms are respected and political inclusiveness is guaranteed.
Egypt is a key actor in the Arab world, North Africa and the Near and Middle East.
On Friday, 6 June 2014, the German-Russian Year of Language and Literature will be launched by Minister of State Böhmer together with Veniamin Kaganov, the Russian Federation’s Deputy Minister of Education and Science, and Mikhail Shvydkoi, the Special Representative of the President of the Russian Federation for International Cultural Cooperation.
These will include a special non-fiction programme at the Moscow International Book Fair as well as the opening of the new German-Russian University in Kazan.
In Russia the German-Russian Year of Language and Literature will kick off in Moscow with a street festival running from 12 to 14 September 2014.
Steinmeier said that the work of the German schools abroad was an “elementary part of German foreign policy”.
Alongside the 450 or so members of school boards, head teachers and administrators from over 140 German schools abroad, this year’s world congress is for the first time also being attended by representatives of approximately 1100 schools which offer the DSD, the German Language Certificate of the Standing Conference of the Ministers of Education and Cultural Affairs.
The Act, which entered into force on 1 January 2014, guarantees German schools abroad a legal right to funding.
In his speech, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier said that the world had changed since the end of the Cold War and that things no longer revolved solely “around the Western sun”.
the legacy of the European Enlightenment”.
An elementary part of foreign policy – the German schools abroad
And that, Steinmeier said, was exactly what the German schools abroad do – every day, on five continents, in 141 German schools abroad and over 1800 partner schools.
Since Willy Brandt’s time cultural relations and education policy has been the “third pillar” of foreign policy. And I would like to strengthen that pillar again!
A recent report by the McKinsey Global Institute, the Minister said, showed that Germany was the world’s most connected country, not only thanks to its export-led economy, but also in terms of human migration and digital data flows.
This connectedness was changing the world, Steinmeier said, but it was also changing our own country:
“And that’s why to my mind cultural relations and education policy means
However, the Minister went on, we can hardly expect young people to come in droves to study in Germany if they’ve never had any contact with the German language:
with even someone like Mark Twain describing “The Awful German Language”, only early exposure to German could further reduce the number of foreign students in Germany who break off their studies.
The Foreign Minister with students and graduates from German schools abroad
In the subsequent panel discussion five young students and graduates from German schools abroad spoke of their plans for the future:
Cristina Heroven from Chile, Irina Avdeeva from Russia and Johannes von Streit, who went to school in Shanghai, are already studying in Germany.
The five young people agreed that their education had brought Germany’s language and culture very close to them. Their opinions differed only on whether Germany would make it into the World Cup final in a month’s time!
Specialist conference on promoting biosecurity in Tanzania
Representatives of different Tanzanian ministries and experts attended the two-day conference to discuss various specialist topics.
African Border Day 2014 - “From Barriers to Bridges”
On 6 June, the fourth African Border Day is paying tribute to the successes of the African Union Border Programme –
15 African countries currently participate in the programme.
On 6 June, alongside representatives of the AU Commission, ambassadors from the AU member states as well as representatives of the EU and of regional African organisations will attend the main celebration in Addis Ababa.
50 anniversary of the Declaration of Cairo
2014 marks the 50th anniversary of the Declaration of Cairo.
Borders should be transformed from barriers into bridges which bring people on both sides closer together and advance integration on the African continent.
The Federal Foreign Office has supported the AUBP since 2008, providing 17 million euros to date:
Agreements reached on over 2000 kilometres of borders
In her Border Day 2014 speech, Lieselore Cyrus, German Ambassador in Ethiopia, wants to highlight how important the AUBP is to peace and security in Africa and to supporting the project.
Copies of all official historical documents on African borders, which are kept in German archives, have been handed over to the AU.
For the first time now in months, there is a faint light at the end of the tunnel in the Ukraine conflict.
We are still not close enough to a solution to the Ukraine crisis.
But after weeks and months of intensive diplomatic efforts, the parties to the conflict are now finally speaking to one another directly.
In the talks due to be held in St Petersburg, I would like to discuss with Russia’s Foreign Minister Lavrov and Poland’s Foreign Minister Sikorski how the positive momentum of the last few days can be used to make the process of de-escalation irreversible.
Federal Foreign Minister Steinmeier on the evening before his trip to St Petersburg
The dialogue that is now beginning between the Ukrainian and the Russian leadership must not under any circumstances become derailed again.
The contact group that has now been established with representatives of Ukraine, Russia and the OSCE must focus in close coordination on ending the violence and continuing the round tables of the National Dialogue that has just begun.
Five other schools were commended for their outstanding pedagogical achievements.
Frank-Walter Steinmeier and presenter Linda Zervakis
Right at the start of the award ceremony for the German School Prize, held in the Heilig-Kreuz-Kirche in Berlin, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier admitted that he had not always enjoyed school.
Yet as a young boy from the small town of Brakelsiek, North Rhine-Westphalia, he was encouraged by a primary school teacher to attend the grammar school in the next town.
“The first few weeks were hard-going,” the Foreign Minister conceded.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement on the eve of his departure:
Steinmeier said that many things had now changed.
Federal Government concerned about Israel’s plans to construct more settlements
The Federal Government is deeply concerned about the Israeli Government’s plans.
This step threatens to further hamper efforts to advance the peace process between Israel and the Palestinians.
Especially now, both sides are called upon to build trust and to eschew unilateral, provocative steps.
The Federal Government is thus calling on the Israeli Government to refrain from publishing the tenders.
Keeping the dialogue with Russia going
Direct talks between Moscow and Kyiv are a crucial issue for the German Foreign Minister:
Non-political projects and exchange
Awarding of the German School Prize at the Heilig-Kreuz-Kirche in Berlin
Steinmeier on his first official visit to Moscow since his re-appointment (14 February 2014)
The subsequent video presentations by the nominated candidates showed that inclusion, fun lessons and creative learning methods are not only possible but par for the course at many schools throughout Germany today.
The “trialogue” encompasses not only cooperation at political level, but also covers cooperation in the field of science and research, an exchange for young people and students as well as cooperation on diplomatic training.
The previous foreign ministerial meetings took place in Kaliningrad (2011), Berlin (2012) and Warsaw (2013).
Five years on, the annual meeting between the three foreign ministers will be dominated by the Ukraine crisis.
Fifteen primary schools, comprehensive schools, vocational schools and even a complementary school for refugees provided brief snapshots of their day-to-day teaching and learning methods.
The jury based their decision on six quality areas:
A Federal Foreign Office Spokesperson issued the following statement on the Israeli Government’s plans to continue with the scheduled construction of approximately 1500 new settlement units in the West Bank and East Jerusalem:
In the last few days, Foreign Minister Steinmeier has spoken to both the Israeli Foreign Minister and the Prime Minister of the Palestinian Authority and has told both sides that, during this delicate stage of the Middle East peace process, everything possible must be done to avoid all hope of a peaceful two-state solution being lost.
A negotiated two-state solution remains the only option which offers the prospect of long-term peace.
achievement, approach to diversity, lesson quality, responsibility, school atmosphere and school as a learning institution.
Lending wings to learning
Main prize for girls’ school in Munich
The pupils of the Anne-Frank-Realschule in Munich are delighted to receive the German School Prize.
This school for girls systematically fosters the interest of its pupils in mathematics, natural sciences and technology.
And in this it is successful:
More than a quarter of pupils go on to train for a career in technology after leaving school.
This school looks after young refugees between the ages of 16 and 21 who have come to Germany without their parents and who first have to learn the German language and how to cope in a foreign country.
German school-leaving qualifications.
The German School Prize has been awarded since 2006 by the Robert Bosch Stiftung and the Heidehof Stiftung in cooperation with the media partners Stern and the Association of Public Broadcasting Corporations in the Federal Republic of Germany.
With the prize the initiators want to acknowledge outstanding pedagogical achievements and use them to benefit school development throughout Germany.
Steinmeier presents German School Prize
Steinmeier explained that he therefore became a “commuting pupil” and initially knew nobody at his new school.
On the evening before his trip to St Petersburg for tripartite talks with Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov and his Polish colleague Sikorski Foreign Minister Steinmeier issued the following statement:
He said that “progress through education” was still the task in hand, but that today much more attention must be given to children from immigrant families.
German-Russian-Polish trialogue
Foreign Minister Steinmeier travels to St Petersburg on 10 June to discuss the crisis in Ukraine with Foreign Ministers Sikorski and Lavrov of Poland and Russia.
This “trialogue” constellation was developed back in 2009 during Foreign Minister Steinmeier’s first term of office.
St Petersburg
In St Petersburg on Tuesday (10 June), the focus will thus be on the situation in Ukraine and on European-Russian relations.
Notwithstanding the crisis, Foreign Minister Steinmeier and his Polish counterpart Sikorski decided to travel to Russia, as planned long in advance.
In dialogue with Russia’s Foreign Minister Lavrov, they wanted to discuss “how the positive momentum of the last few days can be used to make the process of de-escalation irreversible”, as Foreign Minister Steinmeier said on Monday (9 June).
Even at the Federal Foreign Office, we’re not immune to football mania.
More information on the World Cup
The countdown to the World Cup in Brazil is in its final phase.
Today (6 June) Foreign Minister Steinmeier presented the German School Prize, worth 100,000 euros, for outstanding pedagogical achievements.
Today (6 June) Foreign Minister Steinmeier presented the German School Prize, worth 100,000 euros, to the Anne-Frank-Realschule in Munich.
Not leave bright minds undiscovered
After all, he said, Germany was now a true country of immigration – “here we must work much harder at inclusion, especially in the area of education.”
If we want Germany to remain competitive in the international arena, we cannot afford to leave bright minds undiscovered.
Everyone with ability should have the opportunity to pursue their path regardless of their background and gender.
All the schools nominated for the School Prize support this goal.
Schools which receive the German School Prize must reach a good standard in all areas and achieve outstanding results in at least one area – only then can they “lend wings to learning”, as the German School Prize motto dictates.
The Anne-Frank-Realschule in Munich was awarded the main prize, worth 100,000 euros.
Four other schools each received prizes worth 25,000 euros.
The jury prize, also worth 25,000 euros, was awarded to the SchlaU Schule in Munich.
At the award ceremony one pupil explained that although they all come from different countries – ranging from Afghanistan to Somalia and Syria – they all have the same goal:
The SchlaU Schule is therefore another role model for inclusion in German schools – enabling every individual to pursue their path regardless of their background and gender.
To date 43 schools have received awards.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier presents World Cup nations with chocolate footballs
Foreign Minister Steinmeier is thus set to meet the ambassadors of the other 31 nations participating in this year’s World Cup on Wednesday, 11 June.
He will present each ambassador with a lucky charm – a special World Cup football made out of chocolate.
Steinmeier meets his Namibian opposite number
On 2 June, Foreign Minister Steinmeier met his Namibian counterpart, Netumbo Nandi-Ndaitwah, in Berlin.
Their talks focused on German-Namibian relations and  the German Government’s new policy on Africa.
The more specific the questions, the greater the openness to more active foreign policy.
This is in line with the values of the UN Charter and the Basic Law and reflects the self-perception of German foreign policy.
It is striking that the general public is evidently much more in favour of intervention to prevent genocide than policymakers, who would then face the challenge of implementing it responsibly.
It is indeed possible to win support for greater international engagement by Germany if the values (UN Charter and human rights) and the priority of peace-building are clear, the policy is coherent, promising and credible and if we politicians are able to learn from experience and mistakes.
(6) The survey presents opportunities:
This basic foreign policy attitude among the public, people's its relatively high level of interest in foreign policy and the wide support of the younger generation for foreign policy engagement are certainly not the worst starting point for a broad-based dialogue on Germany’s responsibility in a globalised world.
Minister of State Böhmer launches the Year of Russian Language and Literature in Germany
Minister of State Böhmer at the launch of the Year of Language
In her opening message Minister of State Böhmer quoted the great educational reformer Wilhelm von Humboldt,
She said that it was important to embrace these ideas especially in the current difficult political situation.
A door to people and their culture
The Year of Language is designed to promote Russian language and literature in Germany.
In the course of the year competitions, theatre performances and conferences will raise the profile of Russia’s language and literature in Germany.
Böhmer expressed her hope that the events would arouse the interest of more young people in Russia’s language and culture.
She said that this would open doors to Russia’s people, its culture, its academic world and its economy.
Click here to read the Minister of State’s message in full.
The German-Russian Year of Language and Literature will run in both countries:
Over the year ahead a wide variety of events will showcase the German language and literature in Russia and promote the Russian language and culture in Germany.
In Russia the Year of Language will kick off officially in Moscow with a street festival running from 12 to 14 September.
Alongside a special programme within the Moscow Book Fair non/fictioNo, another highlight will be the opening of the German-Russian university in Kazan.
On 6 June Minister of State Maria Böhmer, together with Veniamin Kaganov, the Russian Federation’s Deputy Minister of Education and Science, and Mikhail Shvydkoi, the Special Representative of the President of the Russian Federation for International Cultural Cooperation, launched the German-Russian Year of Language and Literature at Berlin’s State Library.
saying that learning a foreign language opened a window on another world and fostered the desire to rub shoulders with that world.
And she added that after all, there was a double reason to celebrate:
She explained that on 6 June Russians commemorated the birth of Alexander Pushkin and with him the birth of modern Russian literature and the beginning of the so-called Golden Age.
She said that through his works the great writer Pushkin had shaped and enriched the Russian language at the start of the 19th century.
What needs to be done?
On 6 June Minister of State Böhmer joined Russia’s Deputy Minister of Education and Science, Kaganov, and the Russian Special Representative for International Cultural Cooperation, Shvydkoi, to launch the German-Russian Year of Language and Literature.
I say:
The lead ministry informs all other ministries affected by the new proposal and invites their opinions.
The State Secretaries Committee for European Affairs was established in 1963 to discuss fundamental European issues.
If the ministries themselves (up to director-general level) are unable to agree on major EU issues relevant to several ministries, the Committee’s task is to discuss and decide on these issues.
Its role is to settle all contentious matters wherever possible so as to avoid the need for the Cabinet to discuss European issues.
The Committee is chaired by the Minister of State for Europe at the Federal Foreign Office, Michael Roth.
The Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy is the deputy chair.
The Federal Foreign Office as a ministry is further represented by State Secretary Markus Ederer.
The German Permanent Representative to the European Union is also a member of the Committee.
The Committee generally meets once a month.
The Federal Foreign Office EU Coordination Group acts as its secretariat.
Minister of State Roth also takes part in the section of the weekly Cabinet meetings devoted to European policy.
European Affairs Directors-General
Below the level of the State Secretaries Committee for European Affairs, the European Affairs Directors-General from the various ministries have the task of identifying and eliminating possible differences of opinion on European issues.
This group generally also meets once a month, between the State Secretaries Committee meetings, alternately at the Federal Foreign Office and the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy (BMWi).
The meetings are co-chaired by representatives of the two ministries.
The aims of this group are in particular to:
raise awareness in the ministries of politically relevant and/or controversial dossiers which are soon up for decision or shortly to be submitted by the European Commission (“early warning”);
coordinate joint positions on European policy dossiers and agree on further procedure;
document conflicts that cannot be resolved at this level for the State Secretaries Committee so that this body can deal swiftly with such cases;
monitor the implementation of EU directives and infringement proceedings against Germany.
Heads of EU Affairs in Federal Ministries
Each ministry has a Head of EU Affairs,
normally the head of the coordination division in the ministry’s European Affairs Directorate-General.
The Heads of EU Affairs do not have a regular schedule, but meet ad hoc under the chairmanship of the head of the EU Coordination Group at the Federal Foreign Office.
the EU Coordination Group
The EU Coordination Group, part of the European Directorate-General at the Federal Foreign Office, constantly analyses the opinion-forming process in the European institutions and the other EU member states, so as to identify potential conflicts at an early stage and to specify any action required. It seeks to answer the following questions:
What proposals and initiatives is the Commission planning?
Could these conflict with German legislation?
Could German interests be adversely affected? Are differences of opinion between the ministries foreseeable?
How can the Federal Government effectively advocate its position?
Is there a danger of Germany becoming isolated during any ongoing negotiations with the other member states in the Council on EU legislative proposals? Might it be outvoted?
Must Germany’s negotiating position perhaps be altered?
Does the ongoing coordination between the ministries on individual EU policy proposals function smoothly or are there potential conflicts that have to be resolved?
Embassy EU Affairs Officers
These activities are coordinated or personally undertaken by the EU Affairs Officers at the embassies in the EU member states. These officers also follow the European policy “agenda” in their host country and report on the focuses and positions of its European policy.
There are also EU Affairs Officers at Germany’s embassies in the candidate states with which accession negotiations are under way (currently Iceland, Montenegro, Turkey and Serbia).
To carry out their tasks, the EU Affairs Officers need up-to-date, comprehensive and specific information on European policy actions from the Federal Foreign Office in Berlin.
The EU Coordination Group, as part of its functions, provides the Officers with that information.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier travelled to St Petersburg on Tuesday (10 June) to discuss the crisis in Ukraine with Foreign Ministers Sikorski and Lavrov of Poland and Russia.
The German-Russian-Polish trialogue was launched in 2009, prompted by the conviction that the three countries could only contribute to the building of confidence in Europe by working together.
We tried to reach agreement on the fact that, in this profound European crisis, none of the states involved in the talks could have any interest in risking a new division of Europe.
Steinmeier stressed how important it was for there to be “substantive dialogue, above and beyond the first contacts that have been made between the newly elected Ukrainian President and the Russian President.”
He said the key was ending the violence in eastern Ukraine.
Securing the Russian-Ukrainian border is important
The “trialogue” between Germany, Russia and Poland encompasses not only cooperation at political level, but also covers cooperation in the field of science and research, an exchange for young people and students as well as cooperation on diplomatic training.
Continuing the dialogue
Joint press conference after the trialogue meeting
We must make sure that the process now launched through the national dialogue in Ukraine – and at international level with the talks held in France – is not derailed again.
Steinmeier noted that a political settlement to the conflict was still some way off, but stressed that “now the positive momentum must be used.
And everybody knows just how hard we have fought in the past days and weeks to make sure that this division is really prevented.
This must also involve looking for means of securing the border so that weapons and fighters cannot cross it in the future.
Of particular relevance in Steinmeier’s view is the joint management of the border between Ukraine and Russia, in order to halt the flow of weapons and fighters into Ukraine:
Foreign Minister Steinmeier travelled to St Petersburg on 10 June to meet with Foreign Ministers Sikorski and Lavrov and explore options to make the de-escalation in Ukraine “irreversible”.
“For the first time in weeks and even months, options for de-escalating the crisis are in sight,” Foreign Minister Steinmeier announced on Tuesday (10 June), following the trialogue meeting with his Polish and Russian counterparts.
Preventing a division of Europe
The Foreign Ministers Sikorski (left) and Steinmeier (right)
In St Petersburg on Tuesday, Steinmeier saw a “little light at the end of the tunnel”.
This seems to me to be a key issue, and I hope that progress can be made on it.
Russia’s Foreign Minister Lavrov appeared confident that the separatists in eastern Ukraine would adhere to a cease-fire, as has been mooted by Ukrainian President Poroshenko.
Steinmeier said he hoped that Russia would exert its influence on the separatist groups to this end.
Foreign Minister Sikorski of Poland stated that he saw no danger for Russia in the event that Ukraine were to strengthen its ties with the European Union.
Foreign Ministers Steinmeier, Lavrov and Sikorski in St Petersburg (from right to left)
Five years on, the annual meeting between the three foreign ministers – Steinmeier, Sikorski and Lavrov – was dominated by the Ukraine crisis.
At the joint press conference given on Tuesday by the three foreign ministers, Steinmeier said that he had realised during the talks in St Petersburg that “all sides are at least willing to engage in this serious dialogue with the aim of contributing to a further de-escalation of the situation in Ukraine.”
How does the Federal Government make decisions on European policy?
Nowadays European policy covers all policy fields.
To be an effective advocate of Germany’s interests in Brussels, we need efficient policy coordination within the Federal Government.
Flags
The Federal Government participates in the European Union legislative process via the Council of the European Union, on which the Governments of the member states are represented.
Before the Federal Government can contribute coherently to deliberations in the Council and its preparatory bodies, the various Federal ministries in Berlin and Bonn first need to agree on a joint German position on each individual proposal.
Coordinating German policy on Europe
When the Commission adopts a proposal for new legislation, the responsible (lead) ministry must ensure that the Federal Government has an agreed position on the proposal before it is debated for the first time in the Council bodies.
These form the basis for the Federal Government’s negotiating position in the Council.
Responsibility for coordinating the entire national opinion-forming process on a European proposal lies with the lead ministry.
This ministry is responsible in particular for:
keeping the Bundestag and the Bundesrat informed,
involving other ministries,
preparing negotiating positions for the Federal Government’s representatives in Brussels.
The guiding principle for coordinating policy on Europe is consultation and conflict resolution at the lowest possible level.
Since it is not always possible to reach an agreed position on EU matters immediately, a number of bodies exist at various levels to expedite the decision-making process and resolve any conflicts of interest between ministries as quickly as possible.
State Secretaries Committee for European Affairs
They discuss both basic issues (e.g. organisation of European policy coordination, the German language in the EU) and procedural matters (e.g. preparation and follow-up for meetings of the State Secretaries responsible for European affairs or involvement of the Permanent Representation in correspondence between the Federal Ministries and EU organs and offices).
An early-warning system for European policy:
The EU Coordination Group (E-KR) was set up in late 2000 with the aim of ensuring effective coordination of policy on Europe in keeping with the Federal Foreign Office’s competences (conceptual and strategic coherence of policy).
Within the process of coordination in the Federal Government, E-KR is responsible above all for ensuring timely coordination and passing on instructions relating to Federal Foreign Office competences to the Permanent Representatives Committee, for preparing the meetings of European Affairs Directors-General, acting as a secretariat for the State Secretaries Committee for European Affairs and drawing up the weekly Cabinet talking points on Europe.
Germany’s embassies in the other EU member states supplement the German Permanent Representation’s negotiating efforts by directly lobbying governments and persuading the public of Germany’s aims, as well as explaining the reasons for German positions.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier opens European Dialogue on Internet Governance (EuroDIG)
Under the motto “Digital Society at stake – Europe and the future of the Internet”, eco, the Association of the German Internet Industry, is bringing representatives from politics, civil society, business and the technical community together in a multi-stakeholder format.
Further information on the European Dialogue on Internet Governance as well as a detailed programme for the conference are available at www.eurodig.org.
The Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy is the event’s patron.
The EuroDIG will be streamed live at www.eurodig.org/webex.
Anyone interested is welcome to contribute via Twitter using #eurodig.
On Thursday (12 June), Foreign Minister Steinmeier is opening the European Dialogue on Internet Governance (EuroDIG) at the Federal Foreign Office.
Some 500 participants will spend two days discussing the future of our digital society at the Federal Foreign Office.
Numerous debates and workshops will address topics including internet governance and net neutrality, big data and privacy, comercial opportunities and technical challenges of the digital age.
Chocolate football from Cologne Chocolate Museum
32 hours before the World Cup kicks off, Foreign Minister Steinmeier invited the Ambassadors of the 32 participating countries to the Federal Foreign Office.
32 hours to go till kick-off
The Foreign Minister presented each Ambassador with a chocolate football, hand-made at the Chocolate Museum in Cologne.
And I am quite sure that
you will use this World Cup in Brazil to highlight with pride and passion all that is good about your country and its people.
The Brazilian Ambassador thanked Steinmeier for organising the event and reminded everyone that Brazil hosted the World Cup back in 1950.
The press foyer transformed into a football pitch
However, it was always important to see both sides:
all the Ambassadors are hoping that their team will at least reach the final – where they might even come up against Germany!
1914/2014 – Of the Failure of and the Need for Diplomacy: “Their Last Battle – Declining Empires as a Security Risk”
The historic events of summer 1914 are once again to inspire an evening of discussion hosted by Foreign Minister Steinmeier – in collaboration with Alexander Koch, President of the German Historical Museum Foundation – on Friday, 13 June.
The focus this time will be on the situation in Central and Eastern Europe a hundred years ago.
This is part of a series of Federal Foreign Office events on the First War World. The chief topic for the evening is “Their Last Battle – Declining Empires as a Security Risk”.
EU Enlargement:
Serbia
Serbian Prime Minister visits the Federal Foreign Office
Their talks focused above all on regional and European issues, as well as on bilateral topics.
European Union and Asia/Pacific regional organisations
The EU sees Asia as a priority region.
2014 is a historic year for Serbia on its path towards EU membership.
The EU has been cooperating with ASEAN longer than with any other regional organisation.
The Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) has become an important forum for dialogue.
The event will be conducted in German.
EU cooperation with Asia/Pacific regional organisations
Asia is a diverse and dynamic region.
Besides prosperous industrialised countries that are partners of the EU, it contains dynamic emerging economies and countries that are home to two thirds of the world’s poor.
The first Foreign Ministers Meeting between the European Union (then known as the European Community – EC) and ASEAN (Association of Southeast Asian Nations) took place in 1978.
At the initiative of Foreign Minister Steinmeier and in cooperation with the German Historical Museum, the Federal Foreign Office is organising a series of public lectures and discussions in 2014 to commemorate the outbreak of World War I.
In 1980 the two regional organisations formalised their relations with the signing of the EC-ASEAN Cooperation Agreement.
Since the early 1990s Europe has been seeking to intensify its relations with Asia.
In March 1996 the Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) was established as a dialogue process and network at summit and ministerial level and also to promote exchange among experts.
ASEM retains its informal, network character to this day.
Its sole joint institution is the Asia-Europe Foundation (ASEF), which concentrates on fostering cultural and intersocietal exchange between Europe and Asia.
The EU is developing its relations with Asia on the basis of the Guidelines on the EU’s Foreign and Security Policy in East Asia approved by the EU Council on 15 June 2012.
In a series of six discussions German and international historians, writers and policy-makers will systematically explore how and why diplomacy failed on the eve of World War I and why responsible foreign policy is so important.
The Asia and South-East Asia strategies developed by the European Commission in 2001 and 2003 are also relevant in this context.
In addition to events held at the Federal Foreign Office and the German Historical Museum in Berlin, a panel discussion has also been held in Paris with Foreign Minister Steinmeier and his French counterpart Laurent Fabius.
Further information: www.diplo.de/Gedenkjahr2014
Council Guidelines on the EU’s Foreign and Security Policy in East Asia, 15 June 2012 (PDF, 135 KB)
Commission Communication to the Council of 4 September 2001: Europe and Asia – A Strategic Framework for Enhanced Partnerships
Commission Communication: A New Partnership with South-East Asia
A guest article by Foreign Minister Steinmeier entitled “1914 – of the failure of and the need for diplomacy” was published in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung on 25 January 2014 (www.diplo.de/gastbeitrag-erster-weltkrieg).
EU-ASEAN Dialogue
EU-ASEAN Dialogue refers to the cooperation processes between the European Union and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
The negotiations on an EU-ASEAN free trade agreement begun in 2007 were suspended in 2010.
Since then the EU has been negotiating instead with individual ASEAN countries.
The Regional EU-ASEAN Dialogue Initiative (READI) was created for spheres beyond the scope of trade policy such as energy and the environment.
Through the programme ASEAN Regional Integration Support by the EU (ARISE), the EU is also backing ASEAN’s regional integration agenda, including notably its efforts to establish the ASEAN Economic Community (AEC), and develop the expertise of the ASEAN Secretariat in Jakarta in matters of regional integration.
and it has had candidate country status since March 2012.
In Brunei on 26 April 2012 EU and ASEAN Foreign Ministers approved the Bandar Seri Begawan Plan of Action to Strengthen the Enhanced EU-ASEAN Partnership (2013-2017).
The Plan of Action identifies four sectors in which the two regional organisations will work more closely together over the next five years: firstly, the political and security policy sector, including human rights protection, disarmament and the fight against terrorism; secondly, economic cooperation and trade, including energy security; thirdly, socio-cultural/civil society cooperation, including regional and global challenges in the field of environmental and climate protection; fourthly, institutional cooperation.
The Bandar Seri Begawan Plan of Action is the follow-up to the Plan of Action to Implement the Nuremberg Declaration on an ASEAN-EU Enhanced Partnership adopted by the EU Heads of State and Government (Troika) and ASEAN in Singapore on 22 November 2007.
The first official contacts between what was then the European Community (EC) and ASEAN date back to the late 1970s.
In 1980 the EC-ASEAN Cooperation Agreement marked the formal launch of cooperation between the two organisations.
ASEAN, consisting back then of Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand, was thus the EC’s first regional cooperation partner.
The first ASEAN-EU (then EC) Ministerial Meeting took place in Brussels in September 1978.
Bandar Seri Begawan Plan of Action to Strengthen the ASEAN-EU Enhanced Partnership (2013-2017) (PDF, 138 KB)
Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM)
2012 ASEM summit venue in Vientiane
The brainchild of Singapore and France, ASEM was launched at the first European-Asian Summit in Bangkok in March 1996.
Since 1996 ASEM Heads of State and Government have convened for summits every two years, alternating between Europe and Asia.
Ministerial Meetings (between foreign, economics, finance, culture and environment ministers) are also held to exchange views and discuss cooperation in greater depth.
On the European side, ASEM is coordinated by the country holding the EU presidency and the European External Action Service.
On the Asian side, this function is assumed by an ASEAN and a non-ASEAN country in tandem.
The Foreign Ministers and their senior officials act as coordinators of the entire process.
Climate conference in Bonn –
Living up to Mayor of Bonn Jürgen Nimptsch’s motto, the climate conference in Bonn was opened by a bike tour along the Rhine.
Participants in front of the Maritim Hotel Bonn at the start of the UNFCCC bike tour
The event was initiated by Christiana Figueres, the Executive Secretary of the Bonn-based Secretariat of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).
Together with the City of Bonn and the German Cyclist’s Association, a tour along the Rhine was organised for the conference participants.
The bikes were all provided by the German railway company Deutsche Bahn – apart from one particularly environmentally-friendly bamboo bike brought from Ghana by Nick Nuttal, spokesperson for the UNFCCC Secretariat.
A sign of the desire for sustainability
this was a clear sign of people’s increasing desire for sustainability.
Following an introduction by Foreign Minister Steinmeier, Russian historian Igor Narskij and Polish editor Adam Krzemiński will outline the Russian and Polish views of early 20th century European history.
The subsequent panel discussion will be chaired by Almut Möller, Head of Program at the Alfred von Oppenheim Center for European Policy Studies.
He is convinced that global environmental change demands new solutions, saying that the Bonn Campus was an ideal place to work on them.
This includes looking after the nearly 5000 conference participants of the annual climate protection conference.
“Greening the Blue” –
for a greener UN
UNFCCC spokesperson Nick Nuttal presenting his bamboo bike from Ghana
Starting from the conference venue, the Maritim Hotel Bonn, the procession of climate campaigners cycled upriver through the tropical heat before taking a ferry to the other side of the Rhine, with a view of the Petersberg mountain, to then cycle downriver towards the second ferry.
Their destination was the Haus Carstanjen castle – the historical nucleus of Bonn’s UN Campus and the UNFCCC Secretariat’s first premises.
Here, the trip was rounded off with a fortifying picnic amid the greenery.
The initiative aims to transform the UN into a low-emission organisation.
The UNFCCC Secretariat has already pledged to reduce its own carbon usage.
Moreover, staff all use a car sharing system instead of increasing the UN’s fleet of cars
Milestones in relations between Serbia and the European Union
Like all countries of the Western Balkans, Serbia was accorded potential candidate country status at the Feira European Council in June 2000.
The Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) that was signed in April 2008 entered into force in September 2013, following ratification by all EU Member States.
Laos hosted the 9th ASEM summit in Vientiane on 5/6 November 2012; the next summit will be held in Milan (Italy) on 16/17 October 2014.
The Foreign Ministers last met in New Delhi (India) in November 2013.
ASEM provides a framework for political, economic and cultural cooperation between Asia and Europe.
The agenda encompasses global issues such as the environment, climate change, energy security and non-proliferation as well as migration, human rights, counter-terrorism measures, labour and employment, and economic and financial cooperation.
Ministerial meetings, seminars and joint projects are all important aspects of ASEM cooperation.
Germany hosted the first ASEM Labour Ministers Meeting in 2006 and the first ASEM Education Ministers Meeting in 2008.
In October 2012 the Governing Mayor of Berlin hosted the second ASEM Mayors and Governors Meeting.
Alongside intergovernmental cooperation, the ASEM partners have also created possibilities for cooperation between civil society in Europe and Asia, such as the Asia-Europe Foundation (ASEF), the Asia-Europe People's Forum (AEPF, a network of non-governmental organisations from Asia and Europe), the Asia-Europe Parliamentary Partnership (AEPP) and the Asia-Europe Business Forum (AEBF).
ASEM comprises the EU member states and the European Commission, the ten ASEAN member states (Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam), the ASEAN Secretariat, the People’s Republic of China, Japan, South Korea, India, Pakistan, Mongolia, Russia, Australia and New Zealand as well as Bangladesh, Norway and Switzerland since 2012.
A day before the World Cup gets under way, Foreign Minister Steinmeier invited the Ambassadors of the participating countries to the Federal Foreign Office.
Everyone was very much looking forward to the competition - and the amazing chocolate footballs the Foreign Minister gave the Ambassadors really got them into the mood.
On Wednesday afternoon (11 June), the press foyer in the Federal Foreign Office, which is more often used for press conferences and greeting visitors from around the world, was completely transformed in honour of the World Cup: the red carpet was replaced by turf, and there were flags everywhere.
Not all the guests turned up in their customary suits: some were wearing football shirts, or had football scarves around their necks.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and Brazil’s Ambassador Viotti
32 hours before the whistle blows to start the first match, Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier invited the Ambassadors of the 32 countries sending teams to the World Cup to the Foreign Office for a gathering designed to get everyone truly fired up for the tournament.
Handing out chocolate, Steinmeier said with a laugh in his speech, might at first seem to be a strange idea in these tropical temperatures.
But if you thought about it, there was in fact no better symbol of the World Cup than a chocolate football:
as Steinmeier said, the ingredients are sugar, cocoa and cocoa butter – all of which are available in abundance in Brazil.
More than just a football tournament
Steinmeier wished Brazilian Ambassador Maria Viotti “as wonderful a World Cup as we had here”. Nowadays, he went on, the World Cup was more than just a football tournament:
[The World Cup] is a unique opportunity to showcase one’s country, one’s culture, one’s passions.
Since then, she said, the country had changed dramatically.
The population had quadrupled and the country had undergone industrialisation, democratisation and political stabilisation.
The only thing that hadn’t changed over the past 64 years was the Brazilians’ passion for football.
Everyone wants to get into the final
Referring to the continuing protests by opponents of the World Cup in Brazil, Viotti allowed that everyone had the right to express their opinion freely.
while it was true that a lot of money had been invested in new stadiums, spending on health and education had been more than 200 times as much over the same period.
Moreover, the World Cup would create a large number of jobs and bring tourists to Brazil.
Finally, Ambassador Viotti wished her counterparts from the 32 participating states all the best and “every conceivable success” – apart from actually winning the Cup, of course.
When it came to presenting the chocolate footballs, the usual diplomatic courtesies couldn’t hide one thing:
The current 51 ASEM partners account for some 60% of global GDP and the world’s population as well as over 60% of global trade.
Asia-Europe Foundation (ASEF)
The Asia-Europe Foundation (ASEF) is a private foundation under Singaporean law with its headquarters in Singapore.
all those who want to get things moving must get moving themselves
Many of its important provisions, for example those concerning trade liberalisation, had already been implemented through an interim agreement in February 2010.
ASEF’s origins can be traced back to a Singaporean and French initiative launched during the European-Asian Summit in Bangkok in March 1996.
It was formally established as an ASEM institution at a gathering of ASEM foreign ministers in February 1997.
All those who want to get things moving in climate protection must get moving themselves – living up to Mayor of Bonn Jürgen Nimptsch’s motto, on Whit Monday participants of the climate conference in Bonn went on a bike tour along the Rhine.
At the start of this year’s conference on implementing the international climate protection agreement in Bonn, on Whit Monday some three dozen conference participants mounted their bikes.
ASEF’s role is to intensify European-Asian dialogue at civil society level and specifically to inject new vigour into cultural and intellectual cooperation between these two key economic regions.
All those who want to get things moving in climate protection must get moving themselves, said Mayor Jürgen Nimptsch after the CO2-neutral tour.
UNFCCC Head Figueres said that she was pleased to see more bikes than ever before in front of the UN Campus –
Martin Frick, Head of Division at the Federal Foreign Office, joined in the fun at the bike tour.
The ASEF members are all Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) partners, i.e. the EU member states, the European Commission, the ten ASEAN countries as well as China, Japan, South Korea, India, Pakistan, Mongolia, Australia, Russia and New Zealand.
Strategic framework for the EU’s relations with Asia
The outing forms part of the “Greening the Blue” initiative launched by UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon.
In 2001 the European Commission adopted a strategic framework for the EU’s relations with Asia.
The strategy focuses on six key dimensions:
and last but not least, the City of Bonn, as the home of the UN Campus, has launched an ambitious, integrated climate protection plan – this is the only way to successfully get things moving in climate protection.
engagement in the political and security sphere;
trade and investment relations;
reducing poverty in the region;
strengthening civil society with a view to promoting democracy, good governance and the rule of law in the region;
building partnerships on global issues;
increasing mutual awareness and knowledge.
Furthermore, a visa facilitation agreement entered into force in December 2009, under which citizens of Serbia may enter the Schengen area for tourist purposes without needing a visa.
The European Commission has published regional strategy papers on relations with Asia and Central Asia over the period 2007-2013:
European Commission Regional Strategy for Asia covering the period 2007-2013, 17 November 2010 (PDF, 493 KB)
EU development cooperation with Asia
In January 2007 a new Development Cooperation Instrument (DCI) became the basis for development cooperation between the EU and Asia.
As well as regional programmes, it encompasses five thematic programmes: (1) investment in human resources, (2) the environment, (3) NGOs and local authorities, (4) food security and (5) migration and asylum.
The EU’s development cooperation with Asia has increasingly focused on the poorest countries and particularly vulnerable groups.
Its programmes are designed specifically to achieve a sustainable impact,
with priority given to environmental protection, resource management and the advancement of women.
Trade and investment
With a view to increasing trade and investment flows between Europe and Asia, the EU is promoting the development of the private sector in partner countries and also helping them to prepare for WTO membership and meet obligations they have assumed under international agreements.
From application for EU membership to the formal launch of accession negotiations
For more on the EU’s relations with Asia, visit the website of the European External Action Service.
His team at the Bonn branch of the Federal Foreign Office deals with a variety of matters relating to the UN and other international organisations based in Germany – those located at the UN Campus in Bonn in particular.
On 24 February Serbia and Kosovo had reached agreements on integrated border management (joint control of the border between Serbia and Kosovo by Serbia, Kosovo and the European Union’s EULEX mission) and on Kosovo’s participation in regional forums.
In December 2012, the General Affairs Council reiterated the conditions for opening accession negotiations with Serbia,
including in particular visible and sustained improvement of relations with Kosovo.
In parallel to progress on drawing the country closer to the European Union, Serbia and Kosovo have since October 2012 been engaged in a high-level political dialogue moderated by Catherine Ashton, the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy.
On 19 April 2013, the prime ministers of both countries, Ivica Dačić (Serbia) and Hashim Thaçi (Kosovo) reached a First Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalisation of Relations.
It also mentioned January 2014 as the possible date for the first accession conference.
Prior to the first accession conference on 21 January 2014, the General Affairs Council had adopted the so-called negotiating framework in December 2013.
A strong focus of the negotiating framework for Serbia is the chapter on the normalisation process with Kosovo, as well as the chapters dealing with the rule of law.
The Commission's progress report of 16 October 2013 lists several priorities, including reform of the judiciary and administrative structures, the fight against corruption and organised crime, as well as the protection of minorities.
Conclusions of the General Affairs Council
Conclusions of the European Council, dated 28 June 2013
European Commission progress report on Serbia, dated 16 October 2013
More information on EULEX Kosovo
EU support for Serbia on the path to accession
Serbia receives financial support from the EU through the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance (IPA).
Europe’s budget
In 2013, Serbia received funds in the amount of EUR 179 million.
Since 27 June 2013, the multiannual financial framework has been in place as the EU budget plan for the period 2014–2020.
In a consensus reached during the final negotiations, additional funds are to be allocated to combating youth unemployment.
This means that the negotiations on this key European project have now been concluded. During the negotiation process the Federal Foreign Office served as lead ministry within the German Government.
These projects support public administration capacity building in candidate countries by seconding experts from public institutions in EU member states on a long-term basis.
This framework will determine all EU revenue and spending over the next seven years.
The EU’s multiannual financial framework (MFF, previously known as the financial perspective) is the central planning instrument for the use of European Union funds.
The latter are intended to promote the development of good-neighbourly relations between the countries of the Western Balkans,
The German Government supports the EU prospects of all the countries of the Western Balkans.
Funds are allocated with the aim of financing the EU’s political goals, thereby ensuring its future viability.
Comprehensive normalisation of relations between Serbia and Kosovo must be achieved before accession negotiations can be successfully concluded.
More information on the state of negotiations with Serbia can be found on the European Commission’s website.
With regard to budget funding, the prime concern is to ensure that the level of national contributions paid by each member state is fair.
Agreement on the draft for a new MFF
Progress in these areas will to a large extent determine the speed of accession negotiations.
Germany will keep all its rebates on payments to the EU; in 2011 these amounted to 2.3 billion euros.
The focus was on the search for possible solutions to the conflict in Ukraine.
Briefing in the plane.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier talks to journalists about Ukraine: about how to achieve a lasting de-escalation of the situation in the country.
the so-called trialogue, an annual meeting of the Foreign Ministers of Germany, Poland and Russia, has been on the agenda for months.
This year it is taking place against the backdrop of the crisis in Ukraine.
this is where Steinmeier is meeting his Polish counterpart Radoslaw Sikorski for a preparatory talk
in which they are discussing the objectives of the trialogue-meeting and how to stabilise the situation in Ukraine.
“We want to attempt to advance the talks which took place in Normandy recently by going into further detail here. What needs to be done now is to curb the unrest in eastern Ukraine.”
The delegations then depart for the conference hotel, where Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov is waiting for his guests.
In a confidential discussion, the Ministers discuss topics including the causes of the crisis and possible ways forward.
One issue which Steinmeier considers to be key is securing the border between Ukraine and Russia.
In the subsequent talks between the delegations, the guests from Germany and Poland reiterate that they do not accept Russia’s annexation of Crimea.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier voices the hope that Moscow will use its influence over separatist groups in order to achieve a ceasefire.
At a joint press conference, the three Foreign Ministers later report that they have had an open discussion.
Nonetheless, a solution had not yet been found.
Even though we have seen daily and weekly escalation in recent months, this has given way to a new atmosphere.
And so when Steinmeier talks to journalists, he can report a small light at the end of the tunnel.
We now need to take advantage of this positive momentum
and make the process of de-escalation irreversible.”
Especially in these times of crisis, according to Steinmeier, this was
“highly important!”
Film text: 10 June 2014 Trialogue – St Petersburg
German-Polish-Russian trialogue on Ukraine On 10 June Foreign Minister Steinmeier travelled to St Petersburg where he met his counterparts from Russia and Poland for talks in the so-called trialogue format.
This is one reason why, on 10 June, the German Foreign Minister is flying to St Petersburg for discussions –
The German consulate-general in St Petersburg:
All sides were willing to help de-escalate the situation.
Meetings such as this trialogue between Germany, Russia and Poland – namely exchanges of views which go beyond practical questions of cooperation – could help.
And in this it was successful: the budget for the period 2014–2020 was limited to 960 billion euros, whereas in the previous period it was almost 1 000 billion euros.
Despite this successful consolidation, Germany remains the largest net contributor of the EU, paying almost 20 per cent of the EU budget.
Bild: Germany wants EU funds to be used more economically and efficiently
Bild: Savings have to be made
Where cuts have been made, this has been done with moderation: regions in the new Länder that will no longer get maximum support will continue to receive 64 per cent of their previous support through a combination of various measures.
Given the difficult financial situation, allocations are to be reviewed at the end of the first two years (review clause).
Speaking at the EU summit in Brussels, Federal Chancellor Angela Merkel welcomed the agreement, which was of the utmost importance, she noted, especially if headway was to be made in combating youth unemployment.
In detail: the path towards the MFF 2014–2020
In June 2011 the Commission presented its proposal for the next MFF for the years 2014 to 2020.
In addition, by the end of 2011 work had been completed on drafting some 70 regulations dealing with specific policy fields.
In the first half of 2012, the Danish EU Council Presidency created a document known as the “negotiating box” to keep track of how the negotiations were proceeding.
The work was taken forward on this basis by the Cypriot EU Council Presidency, which in late October presented the first proposals for the allocation of funds under the various expenditure headings.
This was when the negotiations entered the home stretch.
As the 27 member states were, as was expected, unable to agree on the MFF package on 22–23 November 2012, the heads of state and government managed to reach an agreement on 7–8 February 2013.
The Irish EU Council Presidency then began the “trilogue negotiations” with the Commission and the European Parliament and this resulted on 27 June in a political agreement.
Speech by Minister of State Maria Böhmer at the opening of the Year of Russian Language in Germany
Similarly, the European Parliament meeting in plenary session still needs to formally approve the relevant Council Regulation and Interinstitutional Agreement on the MFF.
Lastly, the Commission is expected to submit shortly a draft Own Resources Decision, which needs to be ratified in all 28 member states.
More on the multiannual financial framework on the European Commission website
I am delighted to be taking part in the opening of the Year of Russian Language and Literature in Germany today.
Over the course of a whole year entertaining and informative competitions, theatre performances and conferences will promote the Russian language and its literature in our country.
as this opens doors to the country’s people, its culture, its academic world and its economy.
“When you learn a foreign language, the new words are a window to another world and foster the desire to rub shoulders with that world.”
It is important to embrace these ideas, especially in the current difficult political situation.
The people in Germany and in Russia should not only talk about one another but should talk more to one another.
Because in Europe we are in the midst of the most serious crisis since the end of the Cold War.
This crisis can only be resolved together,
everyone must do their bit.
All the more so given that the people in Ukraine voted so clearly in the presidential elections in their country.
They voted as a majority against violence and chaos and for a future for their country and for a united Ukraine.
A Ukraine whose territorial integrity is respected by everyone.
That is important as it is in direct, confidential discussions that the problems and expectations that we are confronted with can be discussed candidly.
A year ago the Germany Year in Russia and Russia Year in Germany came to a very successful conclusion.
We now want to draw on the success of these “double” years with a “double year” of both languages!
Today we are making our way along this linguistic journey together.
Following the summer break we will open the Year of the German Language and Literature in Russia.
there are few other countries where as many people speak German as in Russia.
Yet first of all we now need to promote the dissemination of the Russian language and its literature here in Germany.
In his typical poetic style, he wrote:
“Just as I do not like red lips without a smile, I have no care for the Russian language without grammatical mistakes!”
And so I now wish you an enjoyable German-Russian evening,
but above all
I wish the German-Russian Year of Language great success!
Thank you and
spassiba!
Day of the Peacekeeper 2014
Bild: State Secretaries Haber, Ederer and Brauksiepe (right) with the honoured peacekeepers
Foreign Minister Steinmeier welcomed Serbian Prime Minister Aleksandar Vučić to the Federal Foreign Office at Werderscher Markt.
View of Belgrade (file photo)
Accession negotiations with the Western Balkan country formally began on 21 January 2014.
Prior to this, Catherine Ashton, the EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, confirmed that Serbia has implemented the essential parts of the normalisation agreement with Kosovo that was reached in April 2013.
Progress on the normalisation of relations between Serbia and Kosovo will to a large extent determine the speed of accession negotiations.
Serbia presented its application for EU membership in December 2009,
Through the EU-facilitated high-level political dialogue, Serbia and Kosovo reached, and began implementing, a First Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalisation of Relations in April 2013. In June 2013, the European Council decided to launch accession negotiations with Serbia.
The Council confirmed the European prospects of the Western Balkan countries in its so-called Thessaloniki Agenda of June 2003,
which also emphasised that economic and political reforms were prerequisites for progress on moving closer to the EU.
This agreement provides the framework for drawing Serbia closer to the European Union.
On 22 December 2009, Serbia officially submitted its application for membership of the European Union.
On 12 October 2011, the European Commission recommended in its statement on Serbia’s application for accession that Serbia be granted candidate country status, provided that Serbia’s dialogue with Kosovo continues and all previous agreements with Kosovo are fully implemented.
On 28 February 2012, the General Affairs Council confirmed that the prerequisites for candidate country status were fulfilled.
The European Council followed the recommendations of the General Affairs Council and granted Serbia candidate country status on 1 March 2012.
It provides for, among other things, establishment of an Association/Community of municipalities with a Serb majority in Kosovo.
In return, Serbia makes the commitment to integrate Serbian security authorities and judicial structures in northern Kosovo into the state of Kosovo.
Following conclusion of the normalisation agreement, the Commission issued a report on 22 April 2013 which states the Council's key criterion has been met and recommends that accession negotiations be opened.
The European Council followed this recommendation and on 28 June 2013 decided to launch accession negotiations with Serbia.
The negotiating framework sets out the principles governing accession negotiations and also identifies the various chapters on which special emphasis will be placed.
Prior to adoption of the negotiating framework by the Council, EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy Catherine Ashton confirmed that Serbia has implemented the essential parts of the normalisation agreement with Kosovo, which was concluded in April 2013.
Besides further pursuing the normalisation process with Kosovo, Serbia must also make progress on reforming its domestic policy, in order to meet the political and economic criteria for accession to the European Union.
From 2008 to 2012, Serbia received a total of approx. EUR 993.9 million in funding, in addition to its share of funding from regional and horizontal programmes.
In addition, Serbia receives EU funding for cross-border cooperation projects.
IPA support is especially focused on the areas of justice and home affairs; reform of public administration; prevention of, and fighting against, corruption; development of the private sector; transportation; environmental protection, climate change and the energy sector; social development; as well as agriculture and rural development.
Through the IPA, Serbia can likewise benefit from EU-led administrative partnerships, the so-called twinning projects.
Serbia also participates in regional and horizontal programmes financed via the IPA.
as well as to strengthen social, economic and political cooperation in the region and to build up local and regional administrative structures.
It is important that the criteria for each step in the process of moving closer to the EU be met completely.
Only in this way will the process of moving closer to the EU function as an incentive to political reforms and regional cooperation.
The German Government expects that the normalization process between Serbia and Kosovo will move forward as accession negotiations with Serbia proceed.
Talks with the Crown Prince of Abu Dhabi
This allowed the two men to continue their talks of two weeks ago, when Steinmeier was visiting a number of countries including the United Arab Emirates.
The Dayton Peace Agreement
The Dayton Peace Agreement of 21 November 1995 negotiated by the warring parties in the former Yugoslavia contains two articles on arms control which form the basis for work that continues to this day.
“We’ve adjusted the temperature today to make it like the conditions in the operational locations of our peacekeepers,” joked moderator Jörg Thadeusz from Rundfunk Berlin Brandenburg (rbb) at the start of the event at Charlottenburg Palace in Berlin.
Despite the high temperatures, many of the guests turned out in uniform – a first sign of the reason for the ceremony.
At the beginning of his visit to Berlin, Crown Prince Sheikh bin Zayed Al Nahyan of Abu Dhabi was welcomed by Foreign Minister Steinmeier.
This was the second time that the Federal Foreign Office, the Federal Ministry of Defence and the Federal Ministry of the Interior had honoured German participants for their contributions to peace missions.
They are working as police officers, soldiers and civilian experts and helping to provide long-term stability to trouble spots and areas of conflict and establish functioning structures in accordance with the rule of law.
“the situation is alarming”
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier on the advance of islamist extremists in Iraq
how dangerous is this advance for this already unstable region?
The situation is alarming because the fighting threatens to plunge not only Iraq, but the whole region which has already been destabilised by the war in Syria, into further violence and chaos.
The ISIS terrorists have already wreaked a great deal of havoc in Syria
and they have now overrun parts of Iraq’s Sunni north.
Turkey – a NATO country – is also at risk.
The speakers at the ceremony were able to find a more earnest tone to acknowledge the commitment of the peacekeepers.
The NATO partners discussed the situation in Iraq in an emergency meeting on Wednesday evening.
Our Turkish partners highlighted that they have not expressed any expectation for NATO to take action.
There are German soldiers at the border between Turkey and Syria.
How great is danger of Germany being indirectly sucked into the conflict?
I see no such danger.
to defend Turkey from rocket attacks from Syria.
Our soldiers will strictly adhere to this mandate.
Bild: State Secretary Ederer giving his address
Securing peace on the African continent was the focal point of this year’s event.
As Europe’s neighbouring continent, Africa is becoming increasingly important in German foreign and security policy.
Similarly, Germany’s involvement in the peace missions under way there is extensive.
Networked approach creates sustainable stability
Bild: A German peacekeeper in action
State Secretary Ederer mentioned the peace mission in Mali as an example of the “networked approach” advocated by the German Government.
Their involvement is complemented through projects in the area of development cooperation.
Ralf Brauksiepe, State Secretary at the Federal Ministry of Defence, spoke of the suicide attack in Djibouti two weeks ago in which three civilian experts of the EU mission EUCAP Nestor were seriously injured.
Like the fate of the OSCE observers in Ukraine, the attack in Djibouti shows how dangerous the everyday work of a peacekeeper can be.
Other important aspects of the Political Principles governing Arms Exports are as follows:
#EuroDIG:
As a result of globalisation, far-flung conflicts have a direct effect on us these days, she said.
every move can cause a chain reaction.
For a free Internet and international standards
They have a good reputation abroad, she said, but they also bring important experiences with them back to Germany.
The Council Common Position of 8 December 2008 defining common rules to govern control of exports or military technology and equipment updated and replaced the EU Code of Conduct on Arms Exports (which merely placed member states under a political obligation), making the rules legally binding on all EU member states.
Peacekeepers from peace missions in Africa honoured
Working for a free Internet and international standards
Following the speeches, three soldiers, three police officers and three civilian experts were honoured.
All of them have participated in a peace mission – be it in Mali, Somalia or South Sudan.
Among them were one former and one current member of the EU mission EUCAP Nestor in the Horn of Africa.
World map of the peace missions in 2013 (Source: ZIF) (PDF, 975 KB)
Internet companies, net activists and political stakeholders all gathered in the Weltsaal at the Federal Foreign Office this morning for the opening of #EuroDIG.
Foreign Minister Steinmeier welcomed the participants to the Federal Foreign Office.
The Federal Government has thus assumed a pioneering role within the European Union in making its small arms exports transparent.
As before, new production lines for small arms in third countries outside NATO and the EU will not be authorised, and the export principle “new for old” will be applied wherever possible.
The European Dialogue on Internet Governance is holding its Berlin première from 12 to 13 June.
Of this figure, 38% were destined for EU member states, NATO and NATO-equivalent countries.
This is the seventh ever Pan-European Dialogue on Internet Governance, and the first to be held in Germany.
There was almost no change in exports of war weapons compared to 2012 (–1.4%).
Like in the previous year, war weapons exports only accounted for 0.09% of total German exports.
They have all been active in trouble spots as members of the Federal Armed Forces, police officers or civilian experts.
State Secretary Markus Ederer praised their work, describing it as “challenging and full of deprivation”, and stressed that in peace missions, only a networked approach could contribute to sustainable stability.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier opened the event as the venue’s host.
Ederer: Civilian involvement important for conflict prevention
Markus Ederer, State Secretary at the Federal Foreign Office, praised the work of the peacekeepers throughout the world, describing it as challenging and full of deprivation.
In his words of welcome to the participants, Steinmeier focused on the importance of a free, safe and open Internet.
The Government’s new guidelines for Africa policy underline the importance of civilian involvement for conflict prevention and post-crisis rehabilitation.
They are protecting maritime transport in the Horn of Africa, providing support in the training of security forces, encouraging reform in the area of the rule of law and offering advice on human rights issues.
He also expressed his delight at the diverse mix of people attending #EuroDIG – in person and online – to discuss developments affecting the Internet.
This diversity is reflected in the EU’s cooperation with the region, which encompasses strategic partnerships with important regional and global players as well as joint efforts to alleviate poverty.
The EU and ASEAN also cooperate on many individual projects in the spheres of energy, the environment, education, trade, etc.
Through the dialogue mechanism Transregional EU-ASEAN Trade Initiative (TREATI), the European Commission and ASEAN exchange information on their legal and regulatory systems with a view to engaging eventually in a process of approximation and harmonisation designed to further expand trade and investment relations.
The Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) is an informal forum for dialogue at political level and a framework for cooperation between Europe and Asia in various spheres.
At the 10th ASEM summit in Milan in October 2014 Croatia will be welcomed as the 52nd ASEM partner.
On 1 August 2012 a German national began a four-year term as one of the Foundation’s Deputy Executive Directors.
The two-day conference includes various panel discussions. It is also being broadcast via Livestream and has its own Twitter hashtag.
Thanks to the Twitter Wall, the online comments are flowing straight into the “offline” discussion at the venue.
Bolstering the participatory approach:
Review 2014
Steinmeier and other #EuroDIG participants
Steinmeier at the opening of #EuroDIG
Balancing freedom and security
What role should the state have in a discussion on the future of the Internet?
Steinmeier responded to people’s fear of constant surveillance,
saying that the state could create the framework to prevent this – provided the public, i.e. its own citizens, trusted it.
Snowden activists at #EuroDIG
However, much damage has already been done, Steinmeier continued, with the NSA affair and the practices revealed by Edward Snowden, himself an employee of the US secret services prior to his disclosures.
He also responded to the Snowden activists in the Weltsaal with their home-made masks.
Steinmeier said that the practices revealed by Snowden have shaken Europe’s trust in its prime partner, the United States, and called this “a set-back for all of us”.
That was why it is important to find a “reasonable” balance between freedom and security.
International standards are important