"Para-states" have formed in most conflict-affected areas.
In Chechnya, guerrilla fights continue in the wake of the Russian army's siege of the republic.
The conflict in Tajikistan ended in 1997 and the normalisation process is currently under way.
2.
Each of these conflicts has entailed profound political, social, ethnic and economic changes, as well as affecting other spheres of life.
Presently, it is impossible to return to the pre-conflict situation.
The "para-states" have fortified their independence and are no longer controlled by the external powers on which they depended in the initial phases of the conflicts.
3.
Unresolved conflicts, including those of Transnistria, Chechnya, Abkhazia, Nagorno-Karabakh, South Ossetia and, until recently, Tajikistan, have an adverse effect on the situation in the region.
However, with time, these negative effects become less and less turbulent.
4.
So far, attempts at solving most of the conflicts (Transnistria, Abkhazia, Nagorno-Karabakh, South Ossetia) have failed to produce results other than cease-fires.
Permanent settlement could not be achieved, neither through the use of force nor by way of negotiation.
The power and independence of the "para-states", hard-line leaderships on both sides, and finally, military weakness of the metropolises consolidate the state of suspension.
The conflict in Tajikistan was settled using political methods, and the normalisation process is progressing in a satisfactory manner.
Chechnya has been conquered militarily by Russian troops and Moscow is now implementing its model of imposed "normalisation", but it does not have full control over the republic and cannot contain the growing problems induced by the conflict, such as the emergence of Chechen terrorism.
5.
Some of the negative consequences of the conflicts are gradually being abated by the evolution in Russia's policy towards them (Russia is gradually ceasing playing on the conflicts as foreign policy instruments and is shifting towards political and economic measures).
In the longer term, these tendencies may also help in resolving the actual conflicts themselves.
Full text in pdf - 1.13 MB
The membership of the remaining countries is being spoken of (unofficially) in the perspective of ten to fifteen years.
However, no EU diplomat is able to answer the question of how the integration of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Kosovo, with the EU, will look in practice – these two organisms exist solely owing to the will and efforts of the international community.
Full text in pdf - 345 KB
Part II is an attempt to indicate the areas of Russian reality that are most deeply affected by the Chechen problem.
Full text in pdf - 504 KB
This is, to a certain degree, a return to the economic tasks set out by a team of reformists in the early 1990s, which were impossible to realise at the time due to conflicts between the Kremlin and legislative powers.
2.
The political reforms introduced during Putin's term of office aimed primarily at increasing the Kremlin's control over Russia's socio-political life.
This goal has been achieved to a large extent.
In effect, it has given rise to a growth in the authority and position of the Kremlin, on the one hand and, on the other, to the authoritarisation of Russia's political system.
3.
Within the economic sphere, over the past three and a half years, a land reform was carried out (enabling land sales transactions in the Russian Federation), and changes were also introduced within the budgetary-fiscal sphere and the pension system.
Russia was crossed off the Financial Action Task Force's (FATF) blacklist and granted the status of a market economy by the EU and the USA.
Simultaneously, however, press u re from various groups from the president's entourage opposing the reforms, and also business and regional elites, meant that reform projects often lost their liberal undertone and radicalism already at the stage of forming a legal base.
For this among other reasons, the changes initiated in almost all spheres of the Russian economy in many cases proved to be inconsistent and incomplete.
Problems with their implementation and the slow pace of structural reforms did not allow for the strengthening of spheres other than the raw material sector or making the Russian economy less dependent on the situation on foreign raw material markets.
Therefore, the main goals of President Putin's economic reform program have not been realized.
4.
Non-legislative changes undertaken by the presidential circle were also of particular significance for Russia's present situation.
These changes had no legal basis and resulted from informal actions undertaken or inspired by the authorities.
As a result of these activities, the president gained a loyal majority in parliament, increased the role of security services in the country, simultaneously putting a stop to the direct influence of big business on the Kremlin's political decisions.
Non-legislative changes have also led to the restriction of freedom of speech and pluralism of information in Russia.